1 8
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 15번
까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 들려줍니다.
방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 행사에 참여하는 회사 명단을 공개하려고
② 참가자에게 박람회 장소 변경을 공지하려고
③ 자기소개서 작성 시 유의 사항을 전달하려고
④ 신입 사원 채용을 위한 면접 절차를 설명하려고
⑤ 취업 박람회에 가지고 가야 할 것을 안내하려고
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 자원 낭비를 줄이기 위해 옷을 재활용해야 한다.
② 옷장 정리 시 잘 입지 않는 옷을 처분해야 한다.
③ 유행을 덜 타는 디자인의 옷을 구매해야 한다.
④ 자주 입는 옷을 옷장 문 쪽에 배치해야 한다.
⑤ 비슷한 색깔끼리 옷을 정리해야 한다.
3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 건축가 – 의뢰인 	② 집주인 – 사진사
③ 임대인 – 세입자 	④ 기자 – 잡지사 편집장
⑤ 고객 – 이삿짐센터 직원
4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
②
①
③
④
⑤
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 방송 부탁하기 	② 간식 주문하기
③ 포스터 게시하기 	④ 지원서 출력하기
⑤ QR 코드 제작하기
6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $30 	② $36 	③ $40 	④ $45 	⑤ $50
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 반려동물 박람회에 갈 수 없는 이유를
고르시오.
① 가족 여행을 떠나야 해서
② 반려동물을 입양해야 해서
③ 액세서리를 사러 가야 해서
④ 과학 프로젝트에 참여해야 해서
⑤ 반려견에게 예방 접종을 해야 해서
8. 대화를 듣고, International Game Conference에 관해 언급되지
않은 것을 고르시오.
① 기간 	② 장소 	③ 강의 주제
④ 티켓 가격 	⑤ 기념품
9. Superhero Museum에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을
고르시오.
① 7만 권이 넘는 만화책을 보유하고 있다.
② 시립 도서관 옆에 위치하고 있다.
③ 슈퍼히어로 의상을 대여해 준다.
④ 취학 연령 미만의 아동에게 무료 입장권을 준다.
⑤ 생일에 방문한 고객에게 음료 쿠폰을 제공한다.
10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 손 세정제를
고르시오.
Hand Soap
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① The soccer match is going to start in 30 minutes.
② I’m disappointed that all the chicken was sold out.
③ No matter how much we hurry, it’ll take about an hour.
④ Seating is available on a first come, first served basis.
⑤ Your order was cancelled due to a delivery problem.
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No problem. I can do that for you.
② Sorry. I’m not able to give you a ride.
③ Definitely. He’s already arrived there.
④ Sure. You can take him to the ice rink.
⑤ Cheer up. Your presentation will be great.
2023학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역
제 3 교시 	1
Product 	Price 	Form 	Fragrance Tested on
Animals
A 	$4 	bar 	lemon 	×	①
B 	$7 	bar 	lavender 	○	②
C 	$10 	bar 	vanilla 	×	③
D 	$15 	liquid 	rosemary 	○	④
E 	$22 	liquid 	tea tree 	×	⑤

-- 1 of 8 --

2 	영어 영역
2 8
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① All right. Then I’ll wait for him to return.
② Stay calm. I know where he might be now.
③ Believe me. He’ll come back before the deadline.
④ Never mind. He’s already registered for the class.
⑤ No worries. The results of the consultation were fine.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① I’m sorry. I’m tired of having music practice every day.
② Okay. I’ll try to find something new to challenge myself.
③ Absolutely. You’ll be good at playing the ukulele one day.
④ You’re right. I’d better stay away from relationship stress.
⑤ I agree. You should put more effort into the work you’re doing.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Emma가 Tom에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Emma:
① Could you check whether I got double charged?
② Can I get a discount coupon via message again?
③ Would it be okay for me to use your cell phone?
④ Did you insert your credit card to the card reader?
⑤ Is it possible to get a refund through a bank transfer?
[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① practical methods of conflict management
② socially acceptable ways to express anger
③ various behaviors to trigger social conflict
④ communicative skills for customer satisfaction
⑤ situations causing conflict between generations
17. 언급된 전략이 아닌 것은?
① accommodating 	② compromising 	③ competing
④ assessing 	⑤ avoiding
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
To whom it may concern,
I am writing this letter in regard to Sona Lee applying for
an internship in your law firm. I have gotten to know her over
the past year, as a student in my Contracts course. The
assignments she completed were excellent, and demonstrated
a thorough understanding of contract law. She also has
remarkable energy and interpersonal skills. She represents
her class on the law school’s student council and has taken on
this 	responsibility 	with 	spirit, 	interacting 	with 	students
effectively. I support her application wholeheartedly.
Sincerely yours,
Conan Stevenson
① 계약 절차에 대한 이의를 제기하려고
② 우수한 학생을 인턴 채용에 추천하려고
③ 학생회장 선거 운영 방법을 문의하려고
④ 법률 회사의 유능한 변호사를 소개하려고
⑤ 법학 전문 대학원의 교육 과정을 안내하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Jerry의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
“5,000 dollars has been deposited? Thank you. I’ll check it out
now.” Jerry Shaw hung up with a smile on his face. Humming, he
headed to the bank to withdraw some cash. He stopped at the
ATM, inserted the card and entered his PIN. The screen flashed
the message, “Card not valid ― please see a teller.”
What? My
bonus was deposited just now! Entering the bank, Jerry told the
teller what had happened. She studied the screen and frowned. “Mr.
Shaw, your account was closed. All your funds were withdrawn
when you closed it,” she said. “What do you mean? I never did! It
must be identity theft!” yelled Jerry, his voice barely under control.
① delighted 	→ panicked 	② anxious → envious
③ sympathetic → exhausted 	④ grateful → indifferent
⑤ confused 	→ enthusiastic
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Anthropology 	has 	become 	relevant 	for 	addressing 	global
issues. This is not to deny the vital role of ‘hard’ sciences in
addressing these problems. However, if we are to solve global
problems we need a new way of thinking based in humanities and
social sciences. It is impossible to resolve global issues merely
by looking at numbers and statistics. Anthropology thus becomes
crucial, as a discipline and a profession enabling the collection
and interpretation of ‘thick data’ ― in addition to ‘big data’ ― and
helps 	us 	to 	understand 	the 	world 	we 	live 	in 	more
comprehensively. Why is a brand new and expensive ‘smart’
building 	a 	disaster? 	What 	will 	happen 	in 	the 	future 	with
passenger cars? In answering such questions, we should stop
relying only on quantitative data analytics; instead, the most
important decisions should also be informed by anthropological
qualitative 	approaches 	which 	provide 	a 	more 	complete 	and
nuanced picture of people’s lives.
① 광범위한 규모의 문제를 다룰 때는 처리 단계를 세분화해야 한다.
② 실증적 자료를 토대로 해결할 수 있는 문제를 먼저 처리해야 한다.
③ 글로벌 문제 해결을 위해 인류학의 질적 접근법을 활용해야 한다.
④ 전 인류적 문제에 대한 질적 연구는 정량화된 수치에 기반해야 한다.
⑤ 사회 문제의 포괄적 이해를 위해 자료를 반복적으로 검증해야 한다.

-- 2 of 8 --

3	영어 영역
3 8
21. 밑줄 친 it’s an angry protest from the brain’s reward system이
다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Our brains light up when our predicted reality and actual
reality match. Our brains love to be right. We also don’t like to
be 	wrong, 	and 	we 	feel 	threatened 	when 	our 	stereotyped
predictions don’t come true. Psychologist Wendy Mendes asked
White 	and 	Asian 	college 	students 	to 	interact 	with 	Latino
students who had been hired as actors by the researchers.
Some 	of 	the 	Latino 	students 	portrayed 	themselves 	as
socioeconomically “high status,” with lawyer fathers, professor
mothers, and summers spent volunteering in Europe. Others
portrayed themselves as “low status,” with unemployed parents
and part-time summer jobs. The researchers found that when
participants interacted with the Latino students who appeared
to come from wealth and thus challenged American stereotypes,
they responded physiologically as if to a threat: their blood
vessels constricted and their heart activity changed. In these
interactions, participants also saw the students who violated
stereotypes as less likable. In this way, stereotypes that are
descriptive can easily become
prescriptive. The phenomenon, it
turns out, may have a neuroscientific explanation: it’s an angry
protest from the brain’s reward system.
① Our brain prefers actual reality to predicted reality.
② Humans have a tendency to deny that they are stereotyped.
③ Humans are conditioned to avoid people who resemble them.
④ Our brain dislikes when something goes against its prediction.
⑤ When dissatisfied, the brain operates to make itself feel better.
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
We can imagine natural numbers as whole objects, things our
hunter-gatherer brains can work with. On the other hand,
partial numbers ― decimals, fractions, percentages, and ratios
― simply don’t register as real to our minds. We may be able to
work with them for a given time when we’re in math mode, but
if we’re asked questions at other times, we tend to have trouble
grasping the concept. In other words, any time we give our
audience figures that aren’t natural numbers, the message is
unlikely to make sense to them. Not only are they prone to
make errors remembering and calculating the numbers, but
there’s a good chance they never even envision what we’re
describing in the first place ― because the number attached
isn’t solid. Use natural numbers whenever you can to make your
message real. For numbers less than 1, you can use a strategy
to make things start to show up as natural numbers. If you find
that 0.2% of people have a certain trait, using “1 out of 500”
makes this abstract percentage into a real thing.
① 근사치를 사용하면 정보를 신속하게 처리할 수 있다.
② 복잡한 계산에서 단위를 통일하는 것이 혼동을 방지한다.
③ 수학 기호의 사용이 효과적인 정보 전달을 가능하게 한다.
④ 자연수로 수치가 표현될 때 메시지가 실재적으로 전달된다.
⑤ 메시지에 소수 표현을 포함하는 것은 내용의 신뢰도를 높여 준다.
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Facing large-scale, long-term change can seem overwhelming.
Problems like global contagion or economic inequality are so
complex that it can be hard to believe any intervention might
make a difference. Working through fears of what could be
depends on connecting with the abstract. Linking issues like
climate change, for example, with the realities of our own
neighborhoods, jobs, and relationships, translates conceptual
ideas into concrete emotions. Thinking of how the beaches we
love might disappear, how more frequent floods might destroy
our homes, or how we might have to move to flee mounting
wildfire risk, evokes feelings like anger, sadness, or guilt ―
feelings that inspire us to act. A recent study found that when
people feel personally affected by potential climatic change,
they are more likely to support carbon reduction efforts and
push for proactive policies. Forming emotional connections to
potential futures helps us move from denial and despair to
action.
① effectiveness of making remote problems personal
② impacts of negative tone in news on problem solving
③ contribution of experts to solving large-scale problems
④ limits of personal intervention in minimizing climate change
⑤ risks of attempting to predict events with limited information
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
There was once a certain difficulty with the moons of Jupiter
that is worth remarking on. These satellites were studied very
carefully by Roemer, who noticed that the moons sometimes
seemed to be ahead of schedule, and sometimes behind. They
were
ahead when Jupiter was particularly
close to the earth and
they were
behind when Jupiter was
farther from the earth. This
would have been a very difficult thing to explain according to
the law of gravitation. If a law does not work even in
one place
where it ought to, it is just wrong. But the reason for this
discrepancy was very simple and beautiful: it takes a little while
to
see the moons of Jupiter because of the time it takes light to
travel from Jupiter to the earth. When Jupiter is closer to the
earth the time is a little less, and when it is farther from the
earth, the time is more. This is why moons appear to be, on the
average, a little ahead or a little behind, depending on whether
they are closer to or farther from the earth.
* discrepancy: 불일치
① The Difficulty of Proving the Gravitational Law
② An Illusion Created by the Shadow of the Moon
③ Why Aren’t Jupiter’s Moons Observed Where They Should Be?
④ Obstacles in Measuring Light’s Speed: Limits of Past Technology
⑤ Ahead and Behind: Moons Change Their Position by Themselves

-- 3 of 8 --

4 	영어 영역
4 8
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the number of dementia patients per
1,000 inhabitants in six European countries in 2021 and in 2050
(The number in 2050 is estimated). ① By 2050, the number of
dementia patients per 1,000 people is expected to increase by more
than 10 in all given countries compared to 2021. ② In 2021, Italy
recorded the highest proportion of dementia patients out of the six
countries and it is expected to do so in 2050 as well. ③ The
proportion of dementia patients in Spain was lower than that of
Germany in 2021, but is expected to exceed that of Germany in
2050. ④ Switzerland and the Netherlands had the same proportion
of dementia patients in 2021, and by 2050 those proportions are
both projected to more than double. ⑤ Among the six countries,
Belgium shows the smallest gap between the number of dementia
patients per 1,000 inhabitants in 2021 and in 2050.
* dementia: 치매
26. Josef Frank에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Josef 	Frank, 	born 	in 	Austria 	of 	Jewish 	heritage, 	studied
architecture at the Vienna University of Technology. He then
taught at the Vienna School of Arts and Crafts from 1919 to
1925. He founded an interior design firm together with some
architect 	colleagues 	in 	1925. 	He 	was 	one 	of 	early 	Vienna
modernism’s most important figures, but already in the beginning
of 	the 	1920s 	he 	started 	to 	question 	modernism’s 	growing
pragmatism. He had little appreciation for the French architect Le
Corbusier’s belief that a house should be “a machine for living in.”
He was against the standardized interior design trend of the time,
fearing that it would make people all too uniform. He moved to
Sweden with his Swedish wife in 1933 to escape growing Nazi
discrimination and gained citizenship in 1939. He was the most
prestigious 	designer 	at 	his 	Stockholm 	design 	company. 	In
addition to his architectural work he created numerous designs
for furniture, fabric, wallpaper and carpet.
* pragmatism: 실용주의
① Vienna University of Technology에서 건축학을 공부했다.
② 건축가 동료들과 함께 인테리어 디자인 회사를 설립했다.
③ 초기 비엔나 모더니즘의 가장 중요한 인물 중 한 명이었다.
④ 당시의 표준화된 인테리어 디자인 경향을 옹호했다.
⑤ 나치의 차별을 피해 스웨덴으로 가서 시민권을 얻었다.
27. 2023 Idea Sharing Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치
하지 않는 것은?
2023 Idea Sharing Contest
Do you have any ideas that we can practice in our daily
lives for carbon neutrality? Join the contest and share your
brilliant ideas for our environment!
Guidelines
All participants must ente 	r in teams of 2 to 5 members.
Each team will submit a 7-mi 	nute video clip via email.
The video must include ways to protect our environment.
Judging Criteria
Creativity 	Practicability 	Technical quality
Details
Deadline is April 13, 2023.
Winning teams will be announced on April 21, 2023 via
email.
The three best videos will be posted on our website.
For 	more 	information, 	please 	email 	us 	at
manager@ideasharing.org.
① 개인으로 참가할 수 없다.
② 7분짜리 영상을 웹사이트에 게시해야 한다.
③ 환경을 보호할 수 있는 방법을 영상에 넣어야 한다.
④ 심사 기준에 창의성이 포함된다.
⑤ 수상 팀은 이메일을 통해 안내될 것이다.
28. International Mask Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치
하는 것은?
International Mask Festival
Would you like to appreciate masks from all over the
world? Visit Maywood Hills Museum and enjoy their beauty!
When: Every Tuesday to Sunday in April
(10:00 a.m. - 8:00 p.m.)
Admission Price: $10 per person
Event Information
Booth A: Exhibition of masks from 25 countries
Booth B: Mask making activity (reservation required)
Details
Audio guides are available in Booth A and are included in
the admission price.
After making a mask in Booth B, you can take it home as
a souvenir.
Any 	related 	inquiries 	are 	welcome 	via 	email
(maskfestival@maywood.org) or phone call (234-567-7363).
① 화요일에는 축제가 운영되지 않는다.
② 가면 만들기 활동은 예약 없이 참여할 수 있다.
③ 오디오 가이드는 입장료에 포함되지 않는다.
④ 만든 가면은 기념품으로 집에 가져갈 수 있다.
⑤ 관련 문의는 전화로만 가능하다.

-- 4 of 8 --

5	영어 영역
5 8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Providing feedback to students is a critical task of teachers.
General psychology has shown that knowledge of results is
necessary for improving a skill. Advanced musicians are able to
self-critique their performances, but developing music students
① rely on teachers to supply evaluative feedback. The most
constructive 	feedback 	is 	that 	② which 	expresses 	the
discrepancies between a student’s performance of a piece of
music 	and 	an 	optimal 	version. 	Expert 	teachers 	give 	more
detailed feedback than general appraisals, and music educators
generally 	recognize 	that 	more 	specific 	teacher 	feedback
facilitates student performance improvement. Researchers also
have explored ③ whether the feedback of effective teachers is
more 	often 	positively 	or 	negatively 	expressed, 	that 	is,
constituting praise or criticism. One might intuitively think that
positive comments are more ④ motivated to students and, as a
result, 	are 	more 	associated 	with 	effective 	teaching. 	The
research, however, paints a slightly different picture. Although
positive 	feedback 	is 	⑤ likely 	more 	helpful 	with 	younger
learners and in one-on-one instruction, more advanced music
students seem to accept and benefit from greater levels of
criticism in lessons.
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은
것은?
How do hormones trigger reactions in the body? When a
hormone is released from a gland, it travels in the bloodstream
through the body in search of its ① target. Organs, tissues and
other glands in the body have receptor sites that hormones
must bind to in order to deliver their message and cause an
effect. But because every hormone has its own unique shape,
they are designed to act only on the parts of the body that have
a receptor site with the ② corresponding shape. This mode of
action can be likened to a lock and key mechanism ― if the key
doesn’t fit the lock, then nothing will happen. When a hormone
binds to its receptor, it sets off a chain of other signaling
pathways to create a ③ change in the body. Once the desired
effect 	has 	taken 	place 	and 	there 	is 	too 	much 	hormone
circulating in the blood, this signal is fed back to the glands to
④ boost further hormone release. This is called a feedback loop
and, when functioning correctly, it allows the endocrine system
to ⑤ ensure the conditions in your body remain in balance.
* gland: (분비)선 ** endocrine system: 내분비계
[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. 	Although a balance or harmony between partners clearly
develops over time in a relationship, it is also a factor in initial
attraction and interest in a partner. That is, to the extent that
two people share similar verbal and nonverbal habits in a first
meeting, they will be more comfortable with one another. For
example, fast-paced individuals talk and move quickly and are
more 	expressive, 	whereas 	slow-paced 	individuals 	have 	a
different tempo and are less expressive. Initial interactions
between people at opposite ends of such a continuum may be
more difficult than those between similar types. In the case of
contrasting 	styles, 	individuals 	may 	be 	less 	interested 	in
pursuing a relationship than if they were similar in interaction
styles. 	Individuals 	with 	similar 	styles, 	however, 	are 	more
comfortable and find that they just seem to “click” with one
another. Thus, 	may provide a selection
filter for the initiation of a relationship.
① information deficit
② cultural adaptability
③ meaning negotiation
④ behavioral coordination
⑤ unconditional acceptance
32. 	Animals arguably make art. The male bowerbirds of New
Guinea and Australia dedicate huge fractions of their time and
energy to creating elaborate structures from twigs, flowers,
berries, beetle wings, and even colorful trash. These are the
backdrops to their complex mating dances, which include
acrobatic moves and even imitations of other species. What’s
most amazing about the towers and “bowers” they construct is
that they aren’t stereotyped like a beehive or hummingbird
nest. Each one is different. Artistic skill, along with fine
craftsbirdship, is rewarded by the females. Many researchers
suggest these displays are used by the females to gauge the
cognitive abilities of her potential mates, but Darwin thought
that she was actually attracted to their
beauty. In other words,
the bowers 	; they are
appreciated by the females for their own sake, much as we
appreciate a painting or a bouquet of spring flowers. A 2013
study 	looked 	at 	whether 	bowerbirds 	that 	did 	better 	on
cognitive tests were more successful at attracting mates. They
were not, suggesting whatever the females are looking for, it
isn’t a straightforward indicator of cognitive ability.
① block any possibility of reproduction
② aren’t simply signals of mate quality
③ hardly sustain their forms long enough
④ don’t let the mating competition overheat
⑤ can be a direct indicator of aggressiveness

-- 5 of 8 --

6 	영어 영역
6 8
33. 	Running a business that sells goods and services to
consumers requires getting to know the products they
like. 	More 	than 	that, 	however, 	you 	want 	to
. In
traditional or online sales, people are bound to favorably
regard the vendor and product that they could easily inquire
about and quickly acquire in good order. Using the product can
increase 	or 	decrease 	their 	satisfaction, 	and 	they 	will
remember to repurchase products that meet and exceed their
expectations. Traditional stores make the shopping experience
pleasant 	by 	their 	displays 	and 	personal 	service. 	Internet
retailers lead buyers to products they want through speedy
searches and clicks. A new online selling method that can
generate millions of dollars in purchases within a few minutes
is livestream selling. That’s when hosts streaming their shows
live demonstrate a product and even interactively receive
comments and answer questions from their viewers through
the power of social media. If they like the product, they buy it
immediately through an e-commerce feature on the platform.
Buyers say that the experience is so convenient, it is like
talking to a friend. [3점]
① provide rare items that can draw others’ eyes
② maximize the profit through competitive incentives
③ link positive experiences to the products they purchase
④ examine the current state of digital marketing technologies
⑤ convince yourself the product is a must-have in their lives
34. 	In Hegel’s philosophy, even though there is interaction
and interrelation between the universal and the individual,
. For
Hegel, individuals are not distinguished in terms of Reason. In
Philosophy 	of 	Right 	Hegel 	stresses 	particularity 	and
universality as follows: “A man, who acts perversely, exhibits
particularity. The rational is the highway on which everyone
travels, 	and 	no 	one 	is 	specially 	marked.” 	Here, 	Hegel
maintains that individuals can be differentiated from each
other in terms of their acts but they are not differentiated
with respect to reason. There are specific thoughts, but they
are finally resolved into the universal. One might say that
Hegel seems to focus on the individual like Aristotle but in
reality, he subtly treats the universal as fundamental whereas
Aristotle considers the individual as primary substance and
universal 	as 	secondary 	substance; 	in 	so 	doing 	Aristotle
emphasizes the universal to be subordinate to the individual in
contrast to Hegel. [3점]
* perversely: 별나게
① an individual stands alone apart from the universe
② the universal still has more priority than the individual
③ universal truth cannot be the key to individual problems
④ individuals can’t deduce universal principles from reality itself
⑤ every individual should have his or her own particular universe
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
One of the branches of postmodernism examines the structure
of language and how it is used. It challenges the assumption that
language can be precisely used to represent reality. ① Meanings
of words are ambiguous, as words are only signs or labels given
to 	concepts 	(what 	is 	signified) 	and 	therefore 	there 	is 	no
necessary correspondence between the word and the meaning,
the signifier and the signified. ② The use of signs (words) and
their meaning can vary depending on the flow of the text in
which they are used, leading to the possibility of ‘deconstructing’
text to reveal its underlying inconsistencies. ③ Reality exists
outside of our thoughts, and it is only through language that we
are able to perceive the natural world as it really is. ④ This
approach 	can 	be 	applied 	to 	all 	forms 	of 	representation ―
pictures, films, etc. that gain added or alternative meanings by
the overlaying of references to previous uses. ⑤ This can be
seen particularly in the media, where it is difficult to distinguish
the real from the unreal ― everything is representation, there is
no reality.
[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
36.
The Earth 	formed 	from rocky and 	metallic fragments
during the construction of the solar system ― debris that
was swept up by an initial nucleus and attracted together
into a single body by the force of gravity.
(A) This 	increasing 	gravity, 	combined 	with 	the 	timeless
radioactive decay of elements like uranium and thorium,
caused the new Earth to heat up. The internal temperature
and pressure were high enough for many compounds to
break down or melt, releasing their water and gases.
(B) The original materials were cold as outer space and dry as
dust; 	whatever 	water 	and 	gases 	they 	contained 	were
locked inside individual fragments as chemical compounds.
As the fragments joined, the Earth’s gravity increased,
attracting larger and larger objects to impact the Earth.
(C) Even solid material could begin to move and flow under
such conditions. Separation by density began, and the Earth
started to organize into its present layered structure. The
heaviest metals sank to the center; the lightest materials
migrated outward.
① (A) - (C) - (B) 	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) 	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

-- 6 of 8 --

7	영어 영역
7 8
37.
Representation is control. The power to represent the
world is the power to represent us in it or it in us, for the
final stage of representing merges the representor and the
represented into one. Imperializing cultures produce great
works of art (great representations) which can be put to
work 	intellectually 	as 	armies 	and 	trading 	houses 	work
militarily and economically.
(A) That 	is 	because 	unless 	we 	can 	control 	the 	world
intellectually by maps we cannot control it militarily or
economically. Mercator, Molière, Columbus and Captain
Cook 	imperialized 	in 	different 	ways, 	but 	they 	all
imperialized, 	and 	ultimately 	the 	effectiveness 	of 	one
depended upon and supported the effectiveness of all the
others.
(B) Similarly the US form of contemporary colonization, which
involves occupying economies and political parties rather
than physical territories, is accompanied by the power of
both Hollywood and the satellite to represent the world to
and for the US.
(C) Shakespeare, Jane Austen and maps were as important to
English Imperial power as was the East India Company, the
British 	army 	and 	the 	churches 	of 	England. 	It 	is 	no
coincidence that modern Europe, the Europe of colonization,
was also the Europe of “great art,” and no coincidence either
that it was the Europe of great map makers. [3점]
① (A) - (C) - (B) 	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A) 	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳을 고르시오.
38.
Jacques Derrida argues that instead of one line between Man
on the one side and Animal on the other, there is a multiple
and heterogeneous border; beyond the edge of the “so-called
human,” we find a heterogeneous plurality of the living.
Language, and the word “animal,” deceives us. The word
“animal” 	categorizes 	all 	non-human 	animals 	and 	distances
humans from other animals. ( ① ) Seeing all other animals as
one group in contrast to humans reinforces anthropocentrism,
which contributes to the legitimization of practices in which other
animals are used for human benefit. ( ② ) To account for this
multitude, using the word “animot” has been proposed. ( ③ ) In
speech it refers to the plural, the multiplicity of animals, which
is necessary because there is no one “animal.” ( ④ ) The “mot”
in “animot” refers to the act of naming and the risks involved in
drawing a distinction between human and animal by the human.
( ⑤ ) It reminds us of the fact that it is a word for animals,
not a reference to an existing group of animals.
39.
Indeed, in the Middle Ages in Europe, calculating by hand
and eye was sometimes seen as producing a rather shabby
sort of knowledge, inferior to that of abstract thought.
Babylonian astronomers created detailed records of celestial
movements in the heavens, using the resulting tables to sieve out
irregularities and, with them, the favour of the gods. ( ① ) This
was the seed of what we now call the scientific method ― a
demonstration that accurate observations of the world could be
used 	to 	forecast 	its 	future. 	( ② ) 	The 	importance 	of
measurement in this sort of cosmic comprehension did not
develop smoothly over the centuries. ( ③ ) The suspicion was
due 	to 	the 	influence 	of 	ancient 	Greeks 	in 	the 	era’s
scholasticism, particularly Plato and Aristotle, who stressed
that the material world was one of unceasing change and
instability. 	( ④ ) 	They 	emphasized 	that 	reality 	was 	best
understood 	by 	reference 	to 	immaterial 	qualities, 	be 	they
Platonic forms or Aristotelian causes. ( ⑤ ) It would take the
revelations of the scientific revolution to fully displace these
instincts, with observations of the night sky once again proving
decisive. [3점]
* celestial: 천체의 ** sieve: 거르다
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에
들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Experiments suggest that animals, just like humans, tend
to 	prefer 	exaggerated, 	supernormal 	stimuli, 	and 	that 	a
preference can rapidly propel itself to extreme levels (
peak
shift effect). In one experiment, through food rewards rats
were conditioned to prefer squares to other geometric forms.
In the next step, a non-square rectangle was introduced and
associated with an even larger reward than the square. As
expected, the rats learned to reliably prefer the rectangle.
Less predictable was the third part of the experiment. The
rats were offered the opportunity to choose between the
rectangle 	they 	already 	knew 	and 	associated 	with 	large
rewards and another rectangle, the proportions of which
were 	even 	more 	different 	from 	those 	of 	a 	square.
Interestingly, 	rats 	picked 	this 	novel 	variant, 	without
undergoing any reward-based conditioning in favor of it. A
possible 	explanation 	is 	thus 	that 	they 	chose 	the 	larger
difference from the original square (i.e., the exaggeration of
non-squareness).
뾞
In an experiment, after first establishing an 	(A) 	to
squares, and then to non-square rectangles, rats were seen
to 	pursue 	(B) 	rectangularity 	even 	without 	any
additional reward.
(A) 	(B) 	(A) 	(B)
① inclination 	…… severe 	② opposition …… familiar
③ inclination 	…… vague 	④ opposition …… unexpected
⑤ attachment …… subtle

-- 7 of 8 --

8 	영어 영역
8 8
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Although we humans are equipped with reflexive responses for
survival, at birth we are (a) helpless. We spend about a year
unable to walk, about two more before we can articulate full
thoughts, and many more years unable to provide for ourselves.
We are totally dependent on those around us for our survival.
Now compare this to many other mammals. Dolphins, for instance,
are born swimming; giraffes learn to stand within hours; a baby
zebra can run within forty-five minutes of birth. Across the
animal kingdom, our cousins are strikingly (b) independent soon
after they’re born.
On the face of it, that seems like a great advantage for other
species ― but in fact it signifies a limitation. Baby animals
develop quickly because their brains are wiring up according to
a largely preprogrammed routine. But that (c) preparedness
trades 	off 	with 	flexibility. 	Imagine 	if 	some 	unfortunate
rhinoceros found itself on the Arctic tundra, or on top of a
mountain in the Himalayas, or in the middle of a metropolis. It
would have no capacity to adapt (which is why we don’t find
rhinos in those 	areas). 	This strategy of 	arriving with a
pre-arranged brain works inside a particular niche in the
ecosystem ― but put an animal outside of that niche, and its
chances of thriving are (d) low.
In contrast, humans are able to thrive in many different
environments, from the frozen tundra to the high mountains to
crowded urban centers. This is possible because the human
brain is born remarkably incomplete. Instead of arriving with
everything wired up ― let’s call it “hardwired” ― a human brain
(e) forbids itself to be shaped by the details of life experience.
This leads to long periods of helplessness as the young brain
slowly molds to its environment. It’s “livewired.”
* niche: 적합한 장소
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Rewire Your Brain to Enhance Your Courage!
② Born Unfinished: A Gift of Adaptability to Humans
③ Evolutionary Rivalry Between Humans and Animals
④ How Does Human-Centered Thinking Bring Tragedy?
⑤ Human Brains Develop Through Interaction with Other Species
42. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은
것은?
① (a) 	② (b) 	③ (c) 	④ (d) 	⑤ (e)
[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
There were two neighbors living next to each other. One was a
professor and the other was a merchant who had an unmotivated
son. Both of them had planted the same kind of plant in each of
their gardens. The professor gave a small amount of water to his
plants 	and 	didn’t 	always 	give 	his 	full 	attention 	to 	them.
Meanwhile, in the merchant’s garden, the merchant gave a lot of
water to (a) his plants and looked after them well.
(B)
The merchant was surprised to see this because he thought he
had given his plants better care than the professor. He went to
his neighbor and said, “Only (b) my plants came out from the
roots. How is that possible?” The professor smiled and said,
“You gave your plants so much attention and water that they
didn’t need to work for themselves.” “Is that really a problem?”
said the merchant with a curious look on (c) his face.
(C)
The professor continued his explanation, “I gave my plants just
an adequate amount of water and let their roots search for more.
Their roots went deeper and grew stronger.” At that moment, the
merchant 	recalled the image of 	(d) his son, 	still 	lazy and
dependent on his parents. “Is that how you approach teaching?”
asked the merchant. The professor said, “Yes. Students are like
plants. Sometimes guiding is better than giving.” Nodding silently,
the merchant began to rethink what education is.
(D)
The professor’s plants were simple but looked good, while the
merchant’s plants were much fuller and greener. One night, there
was a heavy storm. After the storm was over, both of the
neighbors inspected the damage to their gardens. The merchant
saw that his plants had come out from the roots and were totally
destroyed by the storm. But, the plants of (e) his neighbor were
not damaged at all and were standing firm.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장
적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) 	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B) 	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) 	② (b) 	③ (c) 	④ (d) 	⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 교수와 상인은 각자의 정원에 같은 종류의 식물을 심었다.
② 상인은 자신이 교수보다 식물을 더 잘 보살폈다고 생각했다.
③ 교수는 학생들이 식물과 같다고 말했다.
④ 상인은 교육이 무엇인지 다시 생각해 보기 시작했다.
⑤ 상인의 식물은 폭풍으로 인한 손상을 입지 않았다.
※ 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

-- 8 of 8 --

