1 8
1번부터 	17번까지는 	듣고 	답하는 	문제입니다. 	1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 	다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 수족관 직원 채용 광고를 하려고
② 수족관 내 기념품 상점을 홍보하려고
③ 수족관 내부 사진 촬영 금지를 안내하려고
④ 수족관 물고기에게 먹이를 주지 말 것을 당부하려고
⑤ 수족관 수조의 유리벽을 두드리지 말 것을 요청하려고
2. 	대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 아기용 선물은 깨끗이 소독해야 한다.
② 아기의 체온 유지에 모자가 도움이 된다.
③ 실내에서는 모자를 벗는 것이 바람직하다.
④ 아기의 방은 적절한 온도 유지가 중요하다.
⑤ 에어컨 사용 시 주기적인 환기가 필요하다.
3. 	다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 생각을 비울 수 있는 취미가 필요하다.
② 악기 연주는 감수성 발달에 도움이 된다.
③ 작문 능력 향상에는 생각의 정리가 중요하다.
④ 올바른 자세를 위해 운동을 꾸준히 해야 한다.
⑤ 메시지를 명확하게 전달하는 습관을 길러야 한다.
4. 	대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
5. 	대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 청소 업체 예약하기
② 인터넷 설치 신청하기
③ 아들의 새 학교에 연락하기
④ 버릴 의자에 스티커 붙이기
⑤ 이사 업체에 이사 날짜 확인하기
6. 	대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $36 	② $40 	③ $45 	④ $50 	⑤ $54
7. 	대화를 듣고, 여자가 독서 모임에 참석하지 못한 이유를 고르시오.
① 고객과의 대화가 계획보다 오래 걸려서
② 아이를 돌봐 줄 사람을 찾지 못해서
③ 공상 과학 장르를 이해하지 못해서
④ 신제품을 온라인에 출시해야 해서
⑤ 모임 날짜를 전달받지 못해서
8. 	대화를 듣고, Now-and-Then Tech Showcase에 관해 언급되지
않은 것을 고르시오.
① 목적 	② 시작일 	③ 장소
④ 관람 시간 	⑤ 입장료
9. 	Found 211에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① H-rail 기차에서 분실한 물건에 대한 정보를 제공한다.
② 웹사이트 회원이 아니어도 사용할 수 있다.
③ 분실한 물건 발견 시 문자 메시지로 통지한다.
④ 다양한 언어로 외국어 서비스가 제공된다.
⑤ 모바일 앱에서도 사용할 수 있다.
10. 	다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 쿠키 커터
세트를 고르시오.
Cookie Cutter Sets
Type 	Shape 	Price 	Material 	Color
① 	A 	Heart 	$11 	Metal 	Yellow
② 	B 	Circle 	$11 	Plastic 	Red
③ 	C 	Heart 	$14 	Silicone 	Yellow
④ 	D 	Star 	$14 	Metal 	Red
⑤ 	E 	Circle 	$20 	Silicone 	Yellow
11. 	대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sorry. I forgot to invite him to my birthday party last week.
② That’s too bad. I’ll let him know the meeting is cancelled.
③ That’s weird. He took all the pictures away with him.
④ Alright. Please say thanks to Mr. Williams for them.
⑤ I’d be happy to. He’ll love to have the pictures.
12. 	대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① What do you mean? The trip was last week.
② I’m sorry to hear that. I hope he’ll get better soon.
③ That’s a relief. I’m glad that he’s doing well in school.
④ Pardon me? I completely forgot the festival tomorrow.
⑤ It’s no big deal. I’ll check the opening day for the festival.
2024학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1

-- 1 of 8 --

2
2 8
13. 	대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Of course. He’ll be grateful for my valuable tips.
② I hope not. You don’t have enough time to study psychology.
③ Good idea. I can definitely get information on that from him.
④ What a shame! I should’ve invited the former graduates.
⑤ No wonder. They didn’t show up yesterday.
14. 	대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① No problem. I can walk him and get some exercise too.
② Certainly. He can help me with my assignment this weekend.
③ Absolutely! You can join me on my business trip tomorrow.
④ Keep it up! You can take care of yourself by working out.
⑤ Not at all. I don’t mind walking you to your house.
15. 	다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Kate가 Professor Lee에게 할 말로
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Kate:
① Do you mind if I change my topic for the writing contest?
② I was wondering why my presentation was postponed.
③ I’m looking forward to awarding you the first prize.
④ I’m afraid you’re not allowed to attend the ceremony.
⑤ Could I switch my presentation date with another student’s?
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 	여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the communication patterns of insects
② the reasons why insects dry their wings
③ the ways insects protect their eggs in the rain
④ the behavior of various insects on a rainy day
⑤ the significance of insects’ role in the food chain
17. 	언급된 곤충이 아닌 것은?
① cockroaches 	② beetles 	③ mosquitos
④ ants 	⑤ flies
18. 	다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Custard Valley Park members,
Custard Valley Park’s grand reopening event will be held on
June 1st. For this exciting occasion, we are offering free
admission to all visitors on the reopening day. There will be
a food stand selling ice cream and snacks. We would like to
invite you, our valued members, to celebrate this event.
Please come and explore the park’s new features such as
tennis courts and a flower garden. Just relax and enjoy the
beautiful scenery. We are confident that you will love the
new changes, and we are looking forward to seeing you soon.
Sincerely,
Katherine Carter
Park Management Team
① 공원 재개장 행사에 초대하려고
② 공원 운영 시간 변경을 공지하려고
③ 공원 이용 규칙 준수를 당부하려고
④ 공원 입장 시 유의 사항을 안내하려고
⑤ 공원 리모델링 사업 계획을 설명하려고
19. 	다음 글에 드러난 Jennifer의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
While the mechanic worked on her car, Jennifer walked
back and forth in the waiting room. She was deeply concerned
about how much it was going to cost to get her car fixed. Her
car’s engine had started making noises and kept losing power
that morning, and she had heard that replacing an engine could
be very expensive. After a few minutes, the mechanic came
back into the waiting room. “I’ve got some good news. It was
just a dirty spark plug. I already wiped it clean and your car is
as good as new.” He handed her the bill and when she checked
it, the overall cost of repairs came to less than ten dollars. That
was far less than she had expected and she felt at ease,
knowing she could easily afford it.
① worried 	→ relieved 	② calm 	→ terrified
③ bored 	→ thrilled 	④ excited → scared
⑤ disappointed → indifferent
20. 	다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Certain hindrances to multifaceted creative activity may lie
in premature specialization, i.e., having to choose the direction
of education or to focus on developing one ability too early in
life. However, development of creative ability in one domain
may 	enhance 	effectiveness 	in 	other 	domains 	that 	require
similar skills, and flexible switching between generality and
specificity 	is 	helpful 	to 	productivity 	in 	many 	domains.
Excessive specificity may result in information from outside
the domain being underestimated and unavailable, which leads
to fixedness of thinking, whereas excessive generality causes
chaos, vagueness, and shallowness. Both tendencies pose a
threat to the transfer of knowledge and skills between domains.
What should therefore be optimal for the development of
cross-domain creativity is support for young people in taking
up creative challenges in a specific domain and coupling it
with encouragement to apply knowledge and skills in, as well
as from, other domains, disciplines, and tasks.
① 창의성을 개발하기 위해서는 도전과 실패를 두려워하지 말아야 한다.
② 전문 지식과 기술을 전수하려면 집중적인 투자가 선행되어야 한다.
③ 창의적인 인재를 육성하기 위해 다양한 교육과정을 준비해야 한다.
④ 특정 영역에서 개발된 창의성이 영역 간 활용되도록 장려해야 한다.
⑤ 조기 교육을 통해 특정 분야의 전문가를 지속적으로 양성해야 한다.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.

-- 2 of 8 --

3
3 8
21. 	밑줄 친 a stick in the bundle이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로
가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Lawyers sometimes describe ownership as a bundle of sticks.
This metaphor was introduced about a century ago, and it has
dramatically transformed the teaching and practice of law. The
metaphor is useful because it helps us see ownership as a
grouping of interpersonal rights that can be separated and put
back together. When you say It’s mine in reference to a
resource, often that means you own a lot of the sticks that
make up the full bundle: the sell stick, the rent stick, the right
to mortgage, license, give away, even destroy the thing. Often,
though, we split the sticks up, as for a piece of land: there may
be a landowner, a bank with a mortgage, a tenant with a lease,
a plumber with a license to enter the land, an oil company with
mineral rights. Each of these parties owns a stick in the
bundle.
* mortgage: 저당잡히다 	** tenant: 임차인
① a legal obligation to develop the resource
② a priority to legally claim the real estate
③ a right to use one aspect of the property
④ a building to be shared equally by tenants
⑤ a piece of land nobody can claim as their own
22. 	다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
When it comes to the Internet, it just pays to be a little
paranoid (but not a lot). Given the level of anonymity with all
that resides on the Internet, it’s sensible to question the validity
of any data that you may receive. Typically it’s to our natural
instinct when we meet someone coming down a sidewalk to
place 	yourself 	in 	some 	manner 	of 	protective 	position,
especially when they introduce themselves as having known
you, much to your surprise. By design, we set up challenges in
which the individual must validate how they know us by
presenting scenarios, names or acquaintances, or evidence by
which 	to 	validate 	(that 	is, 	photographs). 	Once 	we 	have
received that information and it has gone through a cognitive
validation, we accept that person as more trustworthy. All this
happens in a matter of minutes but is a natural defense
mechanism that we perform in the real world. However, in the
virtual world, we have a tendency to be less defensive, as there
appears to be no physical threat to our well-being.
* paranoid: 편집성의 	** anonymity: 익명
① 가상 세계 특유의 익명성 때문에 표현의 자유가 남용되기도 한다.
② 인터넷 정보의 신뢰도를 검증하는 기술은 점진적으로 향상되고 있다.
③ 가상 세계에서는 현실 세계와 달리 자유로운 정보 공유가 가능하다.
④ 안전한 인터넷 환경 구축을 위해 보안 프로그램을 설치하는 것이 좋다.
⑤ 방어 기제가 덜 작동하는 가상 세계에서는 신중한 정보 검증이 중요하다.
23. 	다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
There are pressures within the museum that cause it to
emphasise what happens in the galleries over the activities that
take place in its unseen zones. In an era when museums are
forced 	to 	increase 	their 	earnings, 	they 	often 	focus 	their
energies on modernising their galleries or mounting temporary
exhibitions to bring more and more audiences through the
door. In other words, as museums struggle to survive in a
competitive economy, their budgets often prioritise those parts
of themselves that are consumable: infotainment in the galleries,
goods and services in the cafes and the shops. The unlit,
unglamorous storerooms, if they are ever discussed, are at best
presented as service areas that process objects for the exhibition
halls. And at worst, as museums pour more and more resources
into their publicly visible faces, the spaces of storage may
even suffer, their modernisation being kept on hold or being
given less and less space to house the expanding collections
and serve their complex conservation needs.
① importance of prioritising museums’ exhibition spaces
② benefits of diverse activities in museums for audiences
③ necessity of expanding storerooms for displaying objects
④ consequences of profit-oriented management of museums
⑤ ways to increase museums’ commitment to the public good
24. 	다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Hyper-mobility ― the 	notion 	that 	more 	travel 	at 	faster
speeds covering longer distances generates greater economic
success ― seems to be a distinguishing feature of urban areas,
where more than half of the world’s population currently
reside. By 2005, approximately 7.5 billion trips were made
each day in cities worldwide. In 2050, there may be three to
four times as many passenger-kilometres travelled as in the
year 2000, infrastructure and energy prices permitting. Freight
movement could also rise more than threefold during the same
period. 	Mobility 	flows 	have 	become 	a 	key 	dynamic 	of
urbanization, 	with 	the 	associated 	infrastructure 	invariably
constituting the backbone of urban form. Yet, despite the
increasing level of urban mobility worldwide, access to places,
activities and services has become increasingly difficult. Not
only is it less convenient ― in terms of time, cost and comfort ―
to access locations in cities, but the very process of moving
around in cities generates a number of negative externalities.
Accordingly, many of the world’s cities face an unprecedented
accessibility crisis, and are characterized by unsustainable
mobility systems.
* freight: 화물
① Is Hyper-mobility Always Good for Cities?
② Accessibility: A Guide to a Web of Urban Areas
③ A Long and Winding Road to Economic Success
④ Inevitable Regional Conflicts from Hyper-mobility
⑤ Infrastructure: An Essential Element of Hyper-mobility

-- 3 of 8 --

4
4 8
25. 	다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the share of the EU-28 population
participating in tourism in 2017 by age group and destination
category. ① The share of people in the No Trips category was
over 30% in each of the five age groups. ② The percentage of
people in the Outbound Trips Only category was higher in the
25—34 age group than in the 35—44 age group. ③ In the 35—44
age group, the percentage of people in the Domestic Trips
Only category was 34.2%. ④ The percentage of people in the
Domestic & Outbound Trips category was lower in the 45—54
age group than in the 55—64 age group. ⑤ In the 65 or over
age group, the percentage of people in the No Trips category
was more than 50%.
26. 	Jean Renoir에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Jean Renoir (1894—1979), a French film director, was born
in Paris, France. He was the son of the famous painter
Pierre-Auguste Renoir. He and the rest of the Renoir family
were the models of many of his father’s paintings. At the
outbreak of World War I, Jean Renoir was serving in the
French army but was wounded in the leg. In 1937, he made
La Grande Illusion, one of his better-known films. It was
enormously successful but was not allowed to show in Germany.
During World War II, when the Nazis invaded France in 1940,
he went to Hollywood in the United States and continued his
career there. He was awarded numerous honors and awards
throughout his career, including the Academy Honorary Award
in 1975 for his lifetime achievements in the film industry.
Overall, Jean Renoir’s influence as a film-maker and artist
endures.
① 유명 화가의 아들이었다.
② 제1차 세계대전이 발발했을 때 프랑스 군에 복무 중이었다.
③ La Grande Illusion을 1937년에 만들었다.
④ 제2차 세계대전 내내 프랑스에 머물렀다.
⑤ Academy Honorary Award를 수상하였다.
27. 	2023 Cierra Basketball Day Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 전문가들로부터 다양한 기술을 배울 수 있다.
② 초급자만을 대상으로 한다.
③ 팀 경기는 오후 1시에 시작한다.
④ 온라인으로 등록할 수 있다.
⑤ 수건이 무료로 제공될 것이다.
28. 	Creative Art Class for Kids에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하는 것은?
① 6월부터 9월까지 진행된다.
② 만화 그리기 강좌가 월요일마다 있다.
③ 모든 강좌는 오전에 열린다.
④ 월 수강료에 간식이 포함되어 있다.
⑤ 강좌당 수강 아동 수에 제한이 없다.
2023 Cierra Basketball Day Camp
Cierra Basketball Day Camp provides opportunities for
teens to get healthy and have fun. Come and learn a variety
of skills from the experts!
Site & Dates
∙Cierra Sports Center
∙July 17th—July 21st
Ages & Level: 13—18 years, for beginners only
Camp Activities
∙Skill Drills: 1:00 p.m.—2:00 p.m.
∙Team Games: 2:30 p.m.—3:30 p.m.
∙Free Throw Shooting Contests: 4:00 p.m.—5:00 p.m.
Registration & Cost
∙Register online at www.crrbbcamp.com.
∙$40 (Full payment is required when registering.)
※ A towel will be provided for free.
Creative Art Class for Kids
Want to encourage your child’s artistic talent? Color World
Art Center is going to have art classes for kids from June 1st
to August 31st.
Class Programs & Schedule
󰠂 Clay Arts: Ages 4—6, Every Monday
󰠂 Cartoon Drawing: Ages 7—9, Every Thursday
󰠂 Watercolors: Ages 10—12, Every Friday
Class Time: 4 p.m.—6 p.m.
Monthly Fee
󰠂 $30 per child (snacks included)
󰠂 Family discounts are available (10% discount for each child).
Notes
󰠂 Only 10 kids are allowed per class.
󰠂 Kids should wear clothes that they don’t mind getting dirty.
※ Sign up at Color World Art Center.

-- 4 of 8 --

5
5 8
29. 	다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Consider The Wizard of Oz as a psychological study of
motivation. Dorothy and her three friends work hard to get to
the Emerald City, overcoming barriers, persisting against all
adversaries. They do so because they expect the Wizard to
give ① them what they are missing. Instead, the wonderful
(and wise) Wizard makes them aware that they, not he, always
had the power ② to fulfill their wishes. For Dorothy, home is
not a place but a feeling of security, of comfort with people she
loves; it is wherever her heart is. The courage the Lion wants,
the intelligence the Scarecrow longs for, and the emotions the
Tin Man dreams of ③ being attributes they already possess.
They need to think about these attributes not as internal
conditions but as positive ways ④ in which they are already
relating to others. After all, didn’t they demonstrate those
qualities on the journey to Oz, a journey ⑤ motivated by little
more than an expectation, an idea about the future likelihood of
getting something they wanted?
* adversary: 적(상대)
30. 	(A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
To the extent that an agent relies on the prior knowledge of
its designer rather than on its own percepts, we say that the
agent lacks autonomy. A rational agent should be autonomous ―
it should learn what it can to (A) compensate / prepare 	for
partial 	or 	incorrect 	prior 	knowledge. 	For 	example, 	a
vacuum-cleaning agent that learns to foresee where and when
additional dirt will appear will do better than one that does not.
As a practical matter, one seldom requires complete autonomy
from the start: when the agent has had little or no experience,
it would have to act (B) purposefully / randomly 	unless the
designer gave some assistance. So, just as evolution provides
animals with enough built-in reflexes to survive long enough
to learn for themselves, it would be reasonable to provide an
artificial intelligent agent with some initial knowledge as
well as an ability to learn. After sufficient experience of its
environment, the behavior of a rational agent can become
effectively (C) independent / protective 	of its prior knowledge.
Hence, the incorporation of learning allows one to design a
single rational agent that will succeed in a vast variety of
environments.
(A) 	(B) 	(C)
① compensate 	…… 	randomly 	…… 	protective
② compensate 	…… 	purposefully 	…… 	protective
③ prepare 	…… 	randomly 	…… 	protective
④ compensate 	…… 	randomly 	…… 	independent
⑤ prepare 	…… 	purposefully 	…… 	independent
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. 	People have always needed to eat, and they always will.
Rising emphasis on self-expression values does not put an end
to material desires. But prevailing economic orientations are
gradually being reshaped. People who work in the knowledge
sector continue to seek high salaries, but they place equal or
greater emphasis on doing stimulating work and being able to
follow their own time schedules. Consumption is becoming
progressively less determined by the need for sustenance and
the practical use of the goods consumed. People still eat, but a
growing 	component 	of 	food’s 	value 	is 	determined 	by
its 	aspects. People pay a premium to eat
exotic cuisines that provide an interesting experience or that
symbolize a distinctive life-style. The publics of postindustrial
societies place growing emphasis on “political consumerism,”
such as boycotting goods whose production violates ecological
or ethical standards. Consumption is less and less a matter of
sustenance and more and more a question of life-style ― and
choice.
* prevail: 우세하다 	** cuisine: 요리
① quantitative
② nonmaterial
③ nutritional
④ invariable
⑤ economic
32. 	In labor-sharing groups, people contribute labor to other
people on a regular basis (for seasonal agricultural work such as
harvesting) or on an irregular basis (in the event of a crisis such
as the need to rebuild a barn damaged by fire). Labor sharing
groups are part of what has been called a “moral economy” since
no one keeps formal records on how much any family puts in
or takes out. Instead, accounting is 	.
The group has a sense of moral community based on years of
trust and sharing. In a certain community of North America,
labor sharing is a major economic factor of social cohesion.
When a family needs a new barn or faces repair work that
requires group labor, a barn-raising party is called. Many
families show up to help. Adult men provide manual labor,
and adult women provide food for the event. Later, when
another family needs help, they call on the same people.
* cohesion: 응집성
① legally established
② regularly reported
③ socially regulated
④ manually calculated
⑤ carefully documented

-- 5 of 8 --

6
6 8
33. 	Whatever their differences, scientists and artists begin with
the same question: can you and I see the same thing the same
way? If so, how? The scientific thinker looks for features of the
thing that can be stripped of subjectivity ― ideally, those
aspects that can be quantified and whose values will thus never
change from one observer to the next. In this way, he arrives at
a reality independent of all observers. The artist, on the other
hand, relies on the strength of her artistry to effect a marriage
between her own subjectivity and that of her readers. To a
scientific thinker, this must sound like magical thinking: you’re
saying you will imagine something so hard it’ll pop into
someone else’s head exactly the way you envision it? The artist
has sought the opposite of the scientist’s observer-independent
reality. She creates a reality dependent upon observers, indeed
a reality in which 	in
order for it to exist at all. [3점]
① human beings must participate
② objectivity should be maintained
③ science and art need to harmonize
④ readers remain distanced from the arts
⑤ she is disengaged from her own subjectivity
34. 	One of the common themes of the Western philosophical
tradition is the distinction between sensual perceptions and
rational knowledge. Since Plato, the supremacy of rational
reason is based on the assertion that it is able to extract true
knowledge from experience. As the discussion in the Republic
helps to explain, perceptions are inherently unreliable and
misleading because the senses are subject to errors and illusions.
Only the rational discourse has the tools to overcome illusions
and to point towards true knowledge. For instance, perception
suggests that a figure in the distance is smaller than it really is.
Yet, the application of logical reasoning will reveal that the
figure only appears small because it obeys the laws of geometrical
perspective. Nevertheless, even after the perspectival correction
is applied and reason concludes that perception is misleading,
the figure still appears small, and the truth of the matter is
revealed 	. [3점]
* discourse: 담화 	** geometrical: 기하학의
① as the outcome of blindly following sensual experience
② by moving away from the idea of perfect representation
③ beyond the limit of where rational knowledge can approach
④ through a variety of experiences rather than logical reasoning
⑤ not in the perception of the figure but in its rational representation
35. 	다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Interestingly, experts do not suffer as much as beginners
when performing complex tasks or combining multiple tasks.
Because experts have extensive practice within a limited
domain, the key component skills in their domain tend to be
highly practiced and more automated. ① Each of these highly
practiced skills then demands relatively few cognitive resources,
effectively 	lowering 	the 	total 	cognitive 	load 	that 	experts
experience. ② Thus, experts can perform complex tasks and
combine 	multiple 	tasks 	relatively 	easily. ③ Furthermore,
beginners are excellent at processing the tasks when the
tasks are divided and isolated. ④ This is not because they
necessarily have more cognitive resources than beginners;
rather, because of the high level of fluency they have achieved
in performing key skills, they can do more with what they
have. ⑤ Beginners, on the other hand, have not achieved the
same degree of fluency and automaticity in each of the
component skills, and thus they struggle to combine skills that
experts combine with relative ease and efficiency.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
The growing complexity of computer software has direct
implications for our global safety and security, particularly
as the physical objects upon which we depend ― things like
cars, airplanes, bridges, tunnels, and implantable medical
devices ― transform themselves into computer code.
(A) As all this code grows in size and complexity, so too do
the number of errors and software bugs. According to a
study by Carnegie Mellon University, commercial software
typically has twenty to thirty bugs for every thousand
lines of code ― 50 million lines of code means 1 million
to 1.5 million potential errors to be exploited.
(B) This is the basis for all malware attacks that take advantage
of these computer bugs to get the code to do something it
was not originally intended to do. As computer code grows
more elaborate, software bugs flourish and security suffers,
with increasing consequences for society at large.
(C) Physical things are increasingly becoming information
technologies. 	Cars 	are 	“computers 	we 	ride 	in,” 	and
airplanes are nothing more than “flying Solaris boxes
attached to bucketfuls of industrial control systems.”
* exploit: 활용하다
① (A) － (C) － (B) 	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) 	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

-- 6 of 8 --

7
7 8
37.
Darwin saw blushing as uniquely human, representing
an involuntary physical reaction caused by embarrassment
and self-consciousness in a social environment.
(A) Maybe our brief loss of face benefits the long-term
cohesion of the group. Interestingly, if someone blushes
after making a social mistake, they are viewed in a more
favourable light than those who don’t blush.
(B) If we feel awkward, embarrassed or ashamed when we are
alone, we don’t blush; it seems to be caused by our
concern about what others are thinking of us. Studies have
confirmed that simply being told you are blushing brings
it on. We feel as though others can see through our skin
and into our mind.
(C) However, while we sometimes want to disappear when
we involuntarily go bright red, psychologists argue that
blushing actually serves a positive social purpose. When we
blush, it’s a signal to others that we recognize that a social
norm has been broken; it is an apology for a faux pas. [3점]
* faux pas: 실수
① (A) － (C) － (B) 	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A) 	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Instead, much like the young child learning how to play
‘nicely’, the apprentice scientist gains his or her understanding
of the moral values inherent in the role by absorption from
their colleagues ― socialization.
As particular practices are repeated over time and become
more 	widely 	shared, 	the 	values 	that 	they 	embody 	are
reinforced and reproduced and we speak of them as becoming
‘institutionalized’. ( ① ) In some cases, this institutionalization
has a formal face to it, with rules and protocols written down,
and specialized roles created to ensure that procedures are
followed correctly. ( ② ) The main institutions of state ―
parliament, courts, police and so on ― along with certain of
the professions, exhibit this formal character. ( ③ ) Other
social institutions, perhaps the majority, are not like this;
science is an example. ( ④ ) Although scientists are trained
in the substantive content of their discipline, they are not
formally instructed in ‘how to be a good scientist’. ( ⑤ ) We
think that these values, along with the values that inform many
of the professions, are under threat, just as the value of the
professions themselves is under threat.
* apprentice: 도제, 견습 	** inherent: 내재된
39.
As a result, they are fit and grow better, but they aren’t
particularly long-lived.
When trees grow together, nutrients and water can be
optimally divided among them all so that each tree can grow
into the best tree it can be. If you “help” individual trees
by getting rid of their supposed competition, the remaining
trees are bereft. They send messages out to their neighbors
unsuccessfully, because nothing remains but stumps. Every
tree now grows on its own, giving rise to great differences
in 	productivity. ( ① ) Some 	individuals 	photosynthesize
like mad until sugar positively bubbles along their trunk.
( ② ) This is because a tree can be only as strong as the
forest that surrounds it. ( ③ ) And there are now a lot of
losers in the forest. ( ④ ) Weaker members, who would once
have been supported by the stronger ones, suddenly fall
behind. ( ⑤ ) Whether the reason for their decline is their
location and lack of nutrients, a passing sickness, or genetic
makeup, they now fall prey to insects and fungi. [3점]
* bereft: 잃은 	** stump: 그루터기 	*** photosynthesize: 광합성하다
40. 	다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The evolutionary process works on the genetic variation
that is available. It follows that natural selection is unlikely
to lead to the evolution of perfect, ‘maximally fit’ individuals.
Rather, organisms come to match their environments by
being ‘the fittest available’ or ‘the fittest yet’: they are not
‘the best imaginable’. Part of the lack of fit arises because
the present properties of an organism have not all originated
in an environment similar in every respect to the one in
which it now lives. Over the course of its evolutionary
history, an organism’s remote ancestors may have evolved
a set of characteristics ― evolutionary ‘baggage’ ― that
subsequently constrain future evolution. For many millions
of years, the evolution of vertebrates has been limited to
what can be 	achieved by 	organisms 	with a 	vertebral
column. Moreover, much of what we now see as precise
matches between an organism and its environment may
equally be seen as constraints: koala bears live successfully
on Eucalyptus foliage, but, from another perspective, koala
bears cannot live without Eucalyptus foliage.
* vertebrate: 척추동물
󰀻
The survival characteristics that an organism currently
carries may act as a(n) 	(A) 	to its adaptability when
the organism finds itself coping with changes that arise in
its 	(B) 	.
(A) 	(B) 	(A) 	(B)
① improvement …… diet 	② obstacle …… surroundings
③ advantage 	…… genes 	④ regulator …… mechanisms
⑤ guide 	…… traits

-- 7 of 8 --

8
8 8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Many negotiators assume that all negotiations involve a
fixed pie. Negotiators often approach integrative negotiation
opportunities as zero-sum situations or win-lose exchanges.
Those who believe in the mythical fixed pie assume that
parties’ interests stand in opposition, with no possibility for
integrative settlements and mutually beneficial trade-offs, so
they (a) suppress efforts to search for them. In a hiring
negotiation, a job applicant who assumes that salary is the
only issue may insist on $75,000 when the employer is
offering $70,000. Only when the two parties discuss the
possibilities further do they discover that moving expenses
and starting date can also be negotiated, which may (b) block
resolution of the salary issue.
The tendency to see negotiation in fixed-pie terms (c) varies
depending on how people view the nature of a given conflict
situation. This was shown in a clever experiment by Harinck,
de Dreu, and Van Vianen involving a simulated negotiation
between prosecutors and defense lawyers over jail sentences.
Some participants were told to view their goals in terms of
personal gain (e.g., arranging a particular jail sentence will
help your career), others were told to view their goals in
terms of effectiveness (a particular sentence is most likely to
prevent recidivism), and still others were told to focus on
values (a particular jail sentence is fair and just). Negotiators
focusing on personal gain were most likely to come under
the influence of fixed-pie beliefs and approach the situation
(d) competitively. Negotiators focusing on values were least
likely to see the problem in fixed-pie terms and more inclined
to approach the situation cooperatively. Stressful conditions such
as time constraints contribute to this common misperception,
which in turn may lead to (e) less integrative agreements.
* prosecutor: 검사 	** recidivism: 상습적 범행
41. 	윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Fixed Pie: A Key to Success in a Zero-sum Game
② Fixed Pie Tells You How to Get the Biggest Salary
③ Negotiators, Wake Up from the Myth of the Fixed Pie!
④ Want a Fairer Jail Sentence? Stick to the Fixed Pie
⑤ What Alternatives Maximize Fixed-pie Effects?
42. 	밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은
것은?
① (a) 	② (b) 	③ (c) 	④ (d) 	⑤ (e)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
When invited by her mother to go shopping after lunch,
Ellen hesitantly replied, “Sorry, Mom. I have an English essay
assignment I need to finish.” Her mother persisted, “Come on!
Your father’s birthday is just around the corner, and you wanted
to buy his birthday present by yourself.” Ellen suddenly
realized that her father’s birthday was just two days away.
So (a) she altered her original plan to do the assignment in the
library and decided to go to the shopping mall with her mother.
(B)
Ellen wanted to get a strawberry smoothie in the cafe, but
it was sold out. So she bought a yogurt smoothie instead. The
cafe was not very busy for a Saturday afternoon, and Ellen
settled at a large table to work on her assignment. However,
after a while, a group of students came in, and there weren’t
any large tables left. One of them came over to Ellen’s table
and politely asked, “Could (b) you possibly move to that
smaller table?” Ellen replied, “It’s okay. I was just leaving
anyway.” She hurriedly gathered her assignment leaving the
shoe bag behind under the table.
(C)
Upon arrival at the shopping center, her mother inquired,
“Ellen, have you decided what to buy for his birthday
present?” She quickly replied, “(c) I would like to buy him a
pair of soccer shoes.” Ellen knew that her father had joined
the morning soccer club recently and needed some new
soccer shoes. She entered a shoe store and selected a pair of
red soccer shoes. After buying the present, she told her
mother, “Mom, now, I’m going to do my assignment in the
cafe while you are shopping.”
(D)
“It must be in the cafe,” Ellen suddenly exclaimed when
(d) she realized the gift for her father was missing upon
returning home. She felt so disheartened, worrying it would
be impossible to find it. “Why don’t you call the cafe?”
suggested her mother. When she phoned the cafe and asked
about the shoe bag, the manager said that she would check
and let her know. After a few minutes, she called back and
told Ellen that (e) she had just discovered it. Ellen was so
pleased that the birthday gift had been found.
43. 	주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) 	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B) 	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 	밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) 	② (b) 	③ (c) 	④ (d) 	⑤ (e)
45. 	윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Ellen은 끝내야 할 영어 과제가 있었다.
② 카페에서는 요거트 스무디를 팔지 않았다.
③ 한 무리의 학생들이 카페에 들어왔다.
④ Ellen의 아버지는 최근에 아침 축구 클럽에 가입했다.
⑤ Ellen은 카페에 전화를 걸었다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

-- 8 of 8 --

