고 	3 	영어 	영역 	1
1 8
1번부터 	17번까지는 	듣고 	답하는 	문제입니다. 	1번부터
15번까지는 	한 	번만 	들려주고, 	16번부터 	17번까지는 	두 	번
들려줍니다. 	방송을 	잘 	듣고 	답을 	하시기 	바랍니다.
1. 	다음을 	듣고, 	남자가 	하는 	말의 	목적으로 	가장 	적절한 	것을
고르시오.
① 	발코니 	사용 	수칙을 	안내하려고
② 	화재 	시 	대피 	방법을 	설명하려고
③ 	발코니 	보수공사 	동의를 	요청하려고
④ 	아파트 	안전 	점검 	계획을 	공지하려고
⑤ 	아파트 	주민 	친목 	행사를 	홍보하려고
2. 	대화를 	듣고, 	여자의 	의견으로 	가장 	적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
① 	언어 	교육은 	일찍 	시작할수록 	효과적이다.
② 	외국어 	학습 	시 	구체적인 	목표를 	설정해야 	한다.
③ 	외국어 	교육을 	위한 	다양한 	학습 	방법 	개발이 	필요하다.
④ 	외국어 	말하기 	연습 	시 	실수를 	두려워하지 	않아야 	한다.
⑤ 	언어를 	통해 	그 	언어 	사용자들의 	문화를 	이해할 	수 	있다.
3. 	대화를 	듣고, 	두 	사람의 	관계를 	가장 	잘 	나타낸 	것을 	고르시오.
① 	방송 	작가 	- 	애견 	훈련사 	② 	고객 	- 	애견 	미용사
③ 	달력 	디자이너 	- 	인쇄소 	직원 	④ 	자원봉사자 	- 	수의사
⑤ 	사진작가 	- 	유기견보호소 	직원
4. 	대화를 	듣고, 	그림에서 	대화의 	내용과 	일치하지 	않는 	것을 	고르시오.
5. 	대화를 	듣고, 	남자가 	할 	일로 	가장 	적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
① 	공항에 	마중 	나가기 	② 	안내 	학생 	선정하기
③ 	안내 	학생 	이름표 	만들기 	④ 	학교 	방문단 	사진 	찍기
⑤ 	학교 	방문단 	점심 	준비하기
6. 	대화를 	듣고, 	여자가 	지불할 	금액을 	고르시오. 	[3점]
① 	$68 	② 	$75 	③ 	$81 	④ 	$86 	⑤ 	$95
7. 	대화를 	듣고, 	남자가 	스쿨버스를 	놓친 	이유를 	고르시오.
① 	늦잠을 	자서
② 	병원에 	다녀와서
③ 	아침 	운동을 	오래 	해서
④ 	수업 	발표 	자료를 	두고 	와서
⑤ 	아파트 	엘리베이터가 	고장 	나서
8. 	대화를 	듣고, 	Translators 	For 	All에 	관해 	언급되지 	않은 	것을
고르시오.
① 	지원 	자격 	② 	근무 	장소 	③ 	급여
④ 	채용 	인원 	⑤ 	지원 	방법
9. 	Firefly 	Walk에 	관한 	다음 	내용을 	듣고, 	일치하지 	않는 	것을
고르시오.
① 	곤충 	전문가가 	안내한다.
② 	일일 	최대 	참여 	인원은 	12명이다.
③ 	사전에 	예약을 	해야 	한다.
④ 	기부금만으로 	운영된다.
⑤ 	비가 	오면 	다른 	행사로 	대체된다.
10. 	다음 	표를 	보면서 	대화를 	듣고, 	두 	사람이 	주문할 	베개를
고르시오.
11. 	대화를 	듣고, 	여자의 	마지막 	말에 	대한 	남자의 	응답으로 	가장
적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
① 	That 	painting 	won’t 	be 	displayed 	in 	this 	exhibition.
② 	I’ll 	pack 	all 	my 	paintings 	for 	delivery 	to 	the 	gallery.
③ 	I 	should 	start 	learning 	to 	paint 	like 	you.
④ 	I’ve 	already 	met 	some 	of 	the 	other 	painters.
⑤ 	It 	was 	sold 	on 	the 	first 	day 	of 	the 	gallery 	exhibition.
12. 	대화를 	듣고, 	남자의 	마지막 	말에 	대한 	여자의 	응답으로 	가장
적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
① 	Of 	course. 	When 	are 	you 	available?
② 	No 	worries. 	Your 	package 	is 	the 	cheapest 	one.
③ 	Sure. 	The 	package 	is 	refundable 	if 	you 	don’t 	open 	it.
④ 	Absolutely. 	I’m 	happy 	to 	contact 	you 	before 	you 	leave.
⑤ 	Be 	careful. 	You 	should 	get 	enough 	information 	on 	the 	trip.
2023학년도 	7월 	고3 	전국연합학력평가 	문제지 	1
제 	3 	교시 영어 	영역
Pillows
Model 	Price Thickness
(inches)
Filling
Material
Machine
Wash
① 	A 	$60 	4 	Goose 	Down 	×
② 	B 	$62 	5 	Cotton 	○
③ 	C 	$80 	6 	Goose 	Down 	○
④ 	D 	$85 	6 	Cotton 	×
⑤ 	E 	$110 	7 	Cotton 	○

-- 1 of 8 --

2 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
2 8
13. 	대화를 	듣고, 	여자의 	마지막 	말에 	대한 	남자의 	응답으로 	가장
적절한 	것을 	고르시오. 	[3점]
Man:
① 	Great. 	A 	powerful 	stroke 	is 	my 	strongest 	point 	in 	tennis.
② 	I 	see. 	Is 	there 	any 	lighter 	racket 	I 	can 	borrow 	from 	you?
③ 	I 	agree. 	Try 	to 	practice 	your 	stroke 	more 	with 	this 	racket.
④ 	That’s 	true. 	I’ll 	be 	a 	respectful 	tennis 	player 	from 	now 	on.
⑤ 	Okay. 	I 	should 	drop 	by 	a 	shop 	to 	see 	which 	racket 	suits 	me.
14. 	대화를 	듣고, 	남자의 	마지막 	말에 	대한 	여자의 	응답으로 	가장
적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
Woman:
① 	That’s 	why 	I 	changed 	all 	of 	my 	glass 	cups 	to 	plastic.
② 	I’ll 	try 	to 	look 	for 	a 	delivery 	restaurant 	to 	save 	time.
③ 	There’s 	a 	reason 	that 	restaurant 	is 	popular 	with 	people.
④ 	You 	really 	made 	me 	think 	again 	about 	using 	food 	delivery.
⑤ 	I 	hope 	people 	know 	how 	important 	it 	is 	to 	eat 	fresh 	food.
15. 	다음 	상황 	설명을 	듣고, 	Nicky가 	Chris에게 	할 	말로 	가장
적절한 	것을 	고르시오. 	[3점]
Nicky:
① 	You 	need 	to 	stick 	to 	your 	musical 	identity.
② 	Can 	you 	invite 	me 	to 	your 	band’s 	performance?
③ 	Think 	about 	becoming 	a 	professional 	musician 	later.
④ 	Why 	don’t 	we 	accept 	the 	proposal 	to 	try 	something 	new?
⑤ 	Let’s 	keep 	practicing 	so 	we 	win 	instead 	of 	that 	other 	team.
[16~17] 	다음을 	듣고, 	물음에 	답하시오.
16. 	남자가 	하는 	말의 	주제로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
① 	animalrelated 	terms 	in 	the 	financial 	sector
② 	what 	animals 	symbolize 	by 	country
③ 	aggressive 	tendencies 	of 	animals
④ 	how 	humans 	have 	domesticated 	animals
⑤ 	risks 	and 	benefits 	of 	livestock 	industry 	investment
17. 	언급된 	동물이 	아닌 	것은?
① 	bulls 	② 	sheep 	③ 	cats
④ 	pigs 	⑤ 	chicken
이제 	듣기 	문제가 	끝났습니다. 	18번부터는 	문제지의 	지시에
따라 	답을 	하시기 	바랍니다.
18. 	다음 	글의 	목적으로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
Dear 	Mr. 	Adams,
I 	am 	Jane 	Roe, 	director 	of 	the 	webhosting 	department. 	As
you 	are 	aware, 	the 	upcoming 	weeks 	will 	be 	crucial 	for 	the
operations 	of 	our 	webhosting 	facility 	because 	the 	number 	and
variety 	of 	our 	clients 	are 	expanding 	daily. 	Our 	staff 	are 	doing
their 	best 	under 	the 	circumstances. 	However, 	we 	are 	now
badly 	understaffed 	in 	our 	department, 	so 	I 	would 	like 	to
request 	that 	more 	staff 	members 	be 	hired. 	Most 	of 	our 	staff
have 	spent 	the 	last 	five 	days 	on 	call, 	without 	a 	break. 	I 	hope
you 	will 	consider 	this 	matter. 	I 	look 	forward 	to 	your 	positive
response.
Sincerely,
Jane 	Roe
① 	신설 	부서의 	업무를 	소개하려고
② 	기한 	내 	업무 	완료를 	당부하려고
③ 	부서의 	추가 	인력 	고용을 	요청하려고
④ 	직원들의 	업무 	성과를 	보고하려고
⑤ 	근무 	시설 	개선 	방안을 	제안하려고
19. 	다음 	글에 	드러난 	Susan의 	심경 	변화로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
Susan’s 	daughter 	Carrie 	is 	a 	special 	needs 	kid. 	She 	goes 	to 	a
special 	school, 	special 	camp, 	special 	therapists. 	One 	day, 	out 	of
the 	blue, 	she 	asked 	Susan 	if 	she 	could 	go 	get 	a 	slice 	of 	pizza 	on
her 	own, 	not 	far 	from 	their 	apartment. 	Anxious, 	Susan 	said,
“Well... 	why 	not 	get 	the 	pizza 	and 	bring 	it 	home 	to 	eat?” 	“No!”
said 	Carrie, 	sixteen 	at 	the 	time. 	“Other 	people 	eat 	at 	the 	pizza
place, 	and 	I 	want 	to, 	too!” 	Susan 	was 	concerned, 	but 	said 	okay,
and 	Carrie 	went 	off 	by 	herself 	a 	block 	or 	two 	away. 	After 	a
while, 	Carrie 	came 	back, 	grinning. 	“You 	made 	it! 	What 	made 	you
want 	to 	do 	this?” 	Susan 	asked. 	Carrie 	had 	seen 	her 	friend 	Izzy
on 	TV 	talking 	about 	his 	subway 	ride. 	“I 	thought 	if 	he 	could 	do 	it,
I 	could 	do 	it 	too.” 	Susan’s 	heart 	swelled, 	realizing 	her 	daughter
was 	braver 	and 	much 	more 	grownup 	than 	she 	thought.
① 	indifferent 	→ 	thrilled 	② 	worried 	→ 	proud
③ 	hopeful 	→ 	regretful 	④ 	ashamed 	→ 	satisfied
⑤ 	surprised 	→ 	disappointed
20. 	다음 	글에서 	필자가 	주장하는 	바로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
Leaving 	behind 	technology 	during 	intentional 	time 	alone 	is
essential 	for 	the 	cognitive 	benefits, 	neurological 	repair, 	and
spiritual 	clarity 	that 	are 	the 	gifts 	of 	solitude. 	Multiple 	studies
show 	that 	anxiety 	is 	markedly 	reduced, 	and 	we 	gain 	benefits
similar 	to 	solitude, 	not 	by 	simply 	turning 	our 	phones 	off 	but 	by
having 	them
not 	physically 	with 	us. 	If 	a 	phone 	is 	essential 	for
safety 	during 	time 	alone, 	then 	turn 	off 	alerts, 	cover 	the 	screen 	—
just 	tape 	paper 	right 	over 	it 	— 	and 	keep 	it 	somewhere 	that 	is
terribly 	inconvenient 	to 	access. 	I 	am 	always 	surprised 	by 	how
long 	it 	takes 	me 	to 	give 	up 	the 	impulse 	to 	reach 	for 	my 	phone,
often 	for 	no 	reason 	at 	all, 	other 	than 	to 	“just 	check.” 	Check
what? 	Always 	it 	is 	something 	that 	can 	do 	without 	me 	for 	the
moment. 	It 	is 	important 	that 	we 	allow 	ourselves 	time 	to 	free 	our
minds 	from 	even 	the 	possibility 	of 	constant 	connectivity, 	to
“normalize 	deactivation,” 	as 	herbalist 	Sophia 	Rose 	puts 	it, 	allowing
our 	overstimulated 	neuronal 	connections 	to 	rest 	and 	reassemble.
① 	개인정보 	유출을 	막기 	위해 	휴대전화 	보안을 	강화해야 	한다.
② 	물리적 	고립 	상황에 	대응하기 	위한 	통신 	기술을 	개발해야 	한다.
③ 	업무에 	집중하기 	위해 	근무 	시간에 	휴대전화 	사용을 	자제해야 	한다.
④ 	혼자 	있는 	시간의 	이점을 	얻으려면 	휴대전화와 	떨어져 	있어야 	한다.
⑤ 	고독감을 	느끼지 	않기 	위해 	사람들과 	정서적인 	연결을 	지속해야 	한다.

-- 2 of 8 --

고 	3 	영어 	영역 	3
3 8
21. 	밑줄 	친 	production 	and 	marketing이 	다음 	글에서 	의미하는 	바로
가장 	적절한 	것은?
Humans 	already 	have 	a 	longer 	period 	of 	protected
immaturity 	— 	a 	longer 	childhood 	— 	than 	any 	other 	species.
Across 	species, 	a 	long 	childhood 	is 	correlated 	with 	an
evolutionary 	strategy 	that 	depends 	on 	flexibility, 	intelligence,
and 	learning. 	There 	is 	a 	developmental 	division 	of 	labor.
Children 	get 	to 	learn 	freely 	about 	their 	particular
environment 	without 	worrying 	about 	their 	own 	survival 	—
caregivers 	look 	after 	that. 	Adults 	use 	what 	they 	learned 	as
children 	to 	mate, 	hunt, 	and 	generally 	succeed 	as 	grownups
in 	that 	environment. 	Children 	are 	the 	R&D 	(research 	and
development) 	department 	of 	the 	human 	species. 	We
grownups 	are 	production 	and 	marketing. 	We 	start 	out 	as
brilliantly 	flexible 	but 	helpless 	and 	dependent 	babies, 	great
at 	learning 	everything 	but 	terrible 	at 	doing 	just 	about
anything. 	We 	end 	up 	as 	much 	less 	flexible 	but 	much 	more
efficient 	and 	effective 	adults, 	not 	so 	good 	at 	learning 	but
terrific 	at 	planning 	and 	acting.
① 	agents 	who 	conduct 	the 	tasks 	of 	living 	with 	what 	they 	learned
② 	executives 	who 	assign 	roles 	according 	to 	one’s 	characteristics
③ 	actors 	who 	realize 	their 	dreams 	by 	building 	better 	relations
④ 	traders 	who 	contribute 	to 	economic 	development
⑤ 	leaders 	who 	express 	their 	thoughts 	to 	others
22. 	다음 	글의 	요지로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
In 	order 	to 	be 	successful 	and 	equitable, 	ecosystem
management 	must 	be 	linked 	to 	poverty 	reduction. 	Urban
infrastructure 	projects 	need 	to 	address 	the 	tradeoffs
between 	conservation, 	livelihoods, 	and 	equitable 	distribution
of 	resources. 	Historically 	there 	has 	been 	tension 	when
conservation 	models 	that 	create 	protected 	areas 	are
perceived 	as 	inaccessible 	to 	communities. 	Often, 	these
models 	are 	implemented 	at 	the 	expense 	of 	poor 	and
marginalized 	residents 	and 	users 	of 	resources 	from 	the
areas. 	Social, 	economic, 	and 	environmental 	development
programs 	have 	become 	obstacles 	to 	sustainable 	development
because 	there 	is 	no 	balance 	between 	the 	need 	to 	protect
ecosystem 	services 	and 	the 	desire 	to 	use 	resources 	to
address 	community 	needs. 	Communities 	need 	to 	be 	allowed
to 	identify 	and 	negotiate 	their 	own 	options 	and 	to 	increase
their 	flexibility 	to 	cope 	with 	unexpected 	change.
* 	equitable: 	공평한
① 	무분별한 	도시 	개발은 	사회적 	양극화를 	심화한다.
② 	도시 	기반 	시설 	확충 	시 	안정적인 	재정 	지원이 	중요하다.
③ 	인근 	지역 	간의 	긴밀한 	협력은 	생태계 	보존의 	기반이 	된다.
④ 	자원의 	순환과 	공정한 	배분은 	지속가능한 	발전의 	필수조건이다.
⑤ 	생태계 	관리 	시 	빈곤층을 	포함한 	지역사회의 	요구를 	고려할 	필요가 	있다.
23. 	다음 	글의 	주제로 	가장 	적절한 	것은? 	[3점]
For 	those 	of 	any 	age 	with 	an 	existing 	network 	of 	friendships
built 	up 	in 	the 	threedimensional 	world, 	social 	networking 	sites
can 	be 	a 	happy 	extension 	of 	communication, 	along 	with 	email,
video 	calls, 	or 	phone 	calls, 	when 	facetoface 	time 	together
just 	isn’t 	possible. 	The 	danger 	comes 	when 	a 	fake 	identity 	is
both 	tempting 	and 	possible 	through 	relationships 	that 	are
not
based 	on 	real, 	threedimensional 	interaction, 	and/or 	when 	the
most 	important 	things 	in 	your 	life 	are 	the 	secondhand 	lives 	of
others 	rather 	than 	personal 	experiences. 	Living 	in 	the 	context
of 	the 	screen 	might 	suggest 	false 	norms 	of 	desirable 	lifestyles
full 	of 	friends 	and 	parties. 	As 	ordinary 	human 	beings 	follow
the 	activities 	of 	these 	golden 	individuals, 	selfesteem 	will
inevitably 	drop; 	yet 	the 	constant 	narcissistic 	obsession 	with
the 	self 	and 	its 	inadequacies 	will 	dominate. 	We 	can 	imagine 	a
vicious 	circle 	where 	the 	more 	your 	identity 	is 	harmed 	as 	a
result 	of 	social 	networking 	and 	the 	more 	inadequate 	you 	feel,
the 	greater 	the 	appeal 	of 	a 	medium 	where 	you 	don’t 	need 	to
communicate 	with 	people 	facetoface.
* 	narcissistic: 	자아도취적인
① 	negative 	effects 	of 	social 	networking 	services 	on 	selfperception
② 	unknown 	risks 	to 	personal 	wellbeing 	from 	internet 	addiction
③ 	software 	features 	to 	make 	virtual 	lives 	more 	realistic
④ 	efforts 	to 	increase 	facetoface 	interaction 	for 	social 	bonds
⑤ 	difficulties 	of 	filtering 	out 	fake 	information 	on 	social 	media
24. 	다음 	글의 	제목으로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
Melody 	is 	one 	of 	the 	primary 	ways 	that 	our 	expectations
are 	controlled 	by 	composers. 	Music 	theorists 	have 	identified
a 	principle 	called 	gap 	fill; 	in 	a 	sequence 	of 	tones, 	if 	a
melody 	makes 	a 	large 	leap, 	either 	up 	or 	down, 	the 	next 	note
should 	change 	direction. 	A 	typical 	melody 	includes 	a 	lot 	of
stepwise 	motion, 	that 	is, 	adjacent 	tones 	in 	the 	scale. 	If 	the
melody 	makes 	a 	big 	leap, 	theorists 	describe 	a 	tendency 	for
the 	melody 	to 	“want” 	to 	return 	to 	the 	jumpingoff 	point; 	this
is 	another 	way 	to 	say 	that 	our 	brains 	expect 	that 	the 	leap
was 	only 	temporary, 	and 	tones 	that 	follow 	need 	to 	bring 	us
closer 	and 	closer 	to 	our 	starting 	point, 	or 	harmonic 	“home.”
In 	“Over 	the 	Rainbow,” 	the 	melody 	begins 	with 	one 	of 	the
largest 	leaps 	we’ve 	ever 	experienced 	in 	a 	lifetime 	of 	music
listening: 	an 	octave. 	This 	is 	a 	strong 	schematic 	violation,
and 	so 	the 	composer 	rewards 	and 	soothes 	us 	by 	bringing
the 	melody 	back 	toward 	home 	again, 	but 	not 	by 	too 	much
because 	he 	wants 	to 	continue 	to 	build 	tension. 	The 	third
note 	of 	this 	melody 	fills 	the 	gap.
* 	adjacent: 	인접한
① 	How 	Awesome 	Repetition 	in 	Melody 	Can 	Be!
② 	Why 	a 	Big 	Leap 	Melody 	Tends 	to 	Go 	Back 	Home
③ 	Lyrics 	of 	Songs: 	Key 	Controller 	of 	Our 	Emotions
④ 	Should 	Composers 	Consider 	Their 	Potential 	Audience?
⑤ 	Misunderstanding 	of 	Composers’ 	Intention 	with 	Melody

-- 3 of 8 --

4 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
4 8
25. 	다음 	도표의 	내용과 	일치하지 	않는 	것은?
The 	graph 	above 	shows 	the 	share 	of 	the 	global 	air
passenger 	traffic 	by 	region 	in 	2015 	and 	its 	projected 	share
in 	2040. 	① 	Asia 	Pacific 	had 	the 	highest 	share 	of 	34 	percent
among 	the 	six 	regions 	in 	2015 	and 	is 	expected 	to 	have 	the
highest 	share 	in 	2040. 	② 	Europe 	is 	projected 	to 	rank 	second
in 	2040, 	with 	its 	share 	less 	than 	half 	of 	that 	of 	Asia 	Pacific
that 	year. 	③ 	The 	shares 	of 	Europe 	and 	North 	America 	are
both 	expected 	to 	decrease 	from 	2015 	to 	2040, 	the 	decrease
of 	the 	latter 	being 	greater 	than 	that 	of 	the 	former. 	④ 	The
share 	of 	Middle 	East 	and 	North 	Africa 	in 	2040 	is 	projected
to 	be 	more 	than 	double 	that 	of 	2015, 	while 	in 	Latin 	America
and 	Caribbean, 	the 	share 	will 	decline 	slightly 	from 	2015 	to
2040. 	⑤ 	SubSaharan 	Africa, 	which 	had 	the 	lowest 	share 	in
2015 	among 	the 	regions, 	with 	2 	percent, 	will 	be 	the 	only
region 	to 	keep 	the 	same 	share 	in 	2040.
26. 	Anna 	May 	Wong에 	관한 	다음 	글의 	내용과 	일치하지 	않는 	것은?
Anna 	May 	Wong 	is 	considered 	the 	first 	ChineseAmerican
movie 	star 	in 	Hollywood. 	She 	dropped 	out 	of 	high 	school 	to
pursue 	a 	fulltime 	acting 	career 	and, 	at 	17, 	she 	played 	her
first 	leading 	role 	in
The 	Toll 	of 	the 	Sea. 	Reviewers 	praised
her 	extraordinary 	acting 	but 	her 	ethnicity 	prevented 	U.S.
filmmakers 	from 	casting 	her 	as 	a 	leading 	lady. 	Frustrated,
Wong 	left 	for 	Europe 	in 	1928, 	where 	she 	had 	main 	roles 	in
many 	notable 	films. 	When 	American 	studios 	wanted 	fresh
European 	talent 	in 	the 	1930s, 	Wong’s 	new 	prestige
immediately 	led 	to 	a 	main 	role 	on 	Broadway. 	She 	returned
to 	America 	and 	used 	her 	influence 	to 	advocate 	for 	better
film 	opportunities 	for 	ChineseAmericans. 	In 	1938, 	she 	sold
her 	movie 	costumes 	and 	donated 	the 	money 	from 	the 	sale
to 	organizations 	supporting 	Chinese 	refugees. 	During 	World
War 	II, 	she 	gave 	political 	speeches 	against 	the 	antiAsian
attitudes 	in 	the 	U.S. 	In 	2022, 	she 	became 	the 	first 	Asian
American 	to 	appear 	on 	U.S. 	currency 	― 	a 	century 	after 	she
landed 	her 	first 	leading 	role.
① 	전업 	배우가 	되기 	위해 	고등학교를 	중퇴했다.
② 	유럽에서는 	영화에 	출연하지 	못했다.
③ 	자신의 	영화 	의상 	판매 	수입금을 	기부했다.
④ 	반아시아적 	태도에 	대항하는 	연설을 	했다.
⑤ 	미국 	화폐에 	등장한 	최초의 	아시아계 	미국인이 	되었다.
27. 	Little 	Adventure 	Pack에 	관한 	다음 	안내문의 	내용과 	일치하지
않는 	것은?
Little 	Adventure 	Pack
Little 	Adventure 	Pack 	is 	back 	again 	in 	August! 	Enjoy
the 	science 	of 	the 	National 	Museum 	with 	this 	easy 	and
fun 	takehome 	activity 	pack!
Ages: 	Recommended 	for 	kids 	aged 	5 	to 	7 	years
Price: 	$5 	for 	museum 	members 	/ 	$10 	for 	nonmembers
Contents
• 	Activity 	books 	(puzzles, 	paper 	crafts, 	etc.)
• 	A 	mini 	telescope
• 	A 	toy 	shark
Order
• 	Must 	be 	ordered 	online 	(www.nationalmuseum.org/lap)
• 	Available 	from 	August 	2, 	2023
• 	Total 	number 	of 	packs 	available 	for 	sale 	is 	limited 	to 	200.
① 	5세에서 	7세까지의 	아동에게 	추천된다.
② 	비회원에게는 	10달러에 	판매된다.
③ 	소형 	망원경을 	포함한다.
④ 	온라인으로 	주문되어야 	한다.
⑤ 	총 	판매 	수량에 	제한이 	없다.
28. 	2023 	Oakfield 	Mini 	Marathon에 	관한 	다음 	안내문의 	내용과
일치하는 	것은?
2023 	Oakfield 	Mini 	Marathon
Join 	the 	2023 	Oakfield 	Mini 	Marathon 	to 	celebrate 	the
opening 	of 	Central 	Park 	in 	our 	town! 	Runners, 	joggers,
and 	walkers 	are 	all 	welcome.
When: 	Saturday, 	October 	21, 	starting 	at 	8:30 	a.m.
Where: 	Start 	at 	Gate 	1 	of 	Central 	Park 	and 	finish 	in 	the
parking 	lot
Who: 	Ages 	13 	and 	above
Distance: 	10km
Participation 	Fee: 	$5 	per 	person
Registration
• 	Online 	only 	(www.oakfieldminimarathon.com)
• 	September 	1 	to 	30
※ 	If 	you 	finish 	the 	race, 	you 	will 	receive 	a 	Tshirt 	and
an 	ecertificate.
For 	more 	information, 	visit 	our 	website.
① 	Central 	Park 	주차장에서 	출발한다.
② 	13세 	이상 	참여할 	수 	있다.
③ 	참가비는 	무료이다.
④ 	9월 	1일까지 	등록해야 	한다.
⑤ 	등록을 	하면 	티셔츠를 	받는다.

-- 4 of 8 --

고 	3 	영어 	영역 	5
5 8
29. 	다음 	글의 	밑줄 	친 	부분 	중, 	어법상 	틀린 	것은?
The 	intelligence 	of 	monkeys 	pales 	in 	comparison 	with 	that
of 	our 	closest 	relatives, 	the 	great 	apes: 	orangutans, 	gorillas,
chimpanzees, 	and 	bonobos, 	whose 	brains 	are 	twice 	as 	① 	large
relative 	to 	their 	body 	weight. 	Most 	primatologists 	believe
the 	apes 	acquired 	their 	larger 	brains 	to 	help 	them
communicate 	with 	and 	② 	manipulate 	their 	peers. 	And 	they
certainly 	do 	exhibit 	complex 	social 	interactions 	within 	their
group; 	they 	seem 	capable 	of 	feeling 	empathy, 	have 	a
selfimage, 	and 	exhibit 	a 	degree 	of 	consciousness 	as 	they
can 	recognize 	③ 	themselves 	in 	a 	mirror. 	But 	this 	“social
hypothesis” 	does 	not 	explain 	why 	it 	was 	the 	great 	apes 	that
became 	so 	clever, 	rather 	than 	monkeys 	or 	a 	group 	of
terrestrial 	mammals. 	Nor 	does 	it 	explain 	why 	orangutans,
who 	seldom 	encounter 	their 	neighbors, 	④ 	being 	so 	intelligent.
It 	seems 	likely 	that 	some 	other 	factor 	must 	have 	been 	in
play 	⑤ 	that 	caused 	apes 	to 	become 	more 	intelligent 	in 	the
first 	place, 	and 	which 	could 	subsequently 	have 	enabled 	some
members 	of 	the 	group 	to 	develop 	highlevel 	sociality.
* 	primatologist: 	영장류 	동물학자 	** 	terrestrial: 	육상의
30. 	다음 	글의 	밑줄 	친 	부분 	중, 	문맥상 	낱말의 	쓰임이 	적절하지
않은 	것은? 	[3점]
The 	consequences 	of 	the 	mechanical 	breakdown 	of 	food 	by
cooking 	are 	profound. 	Both 	the 	stiffness 	and 	toughness 	of 	the
food 	is 	drastically 	reduced, 	making 	mechanical 	processing 	far
① 	easier. 	The 	forces 	your 	teeth 	need 	to 	apply 	to 	break 	up
the 	food 	are 	lower, 	and 	the 	food 	② 	releases 	its 	cell 	contents
far 	more 	easily. 	The 	optimal 	tooth 	shape 	for 	breaking 	up 	the
food 	also 	③ 	changes. 	Rather 	than 	needing 	thick, 	flat 	plates
that 	can 	apply 	large 	compression 	forces 	to 	grind 	up 	tough
materials 	and 	crush 	hard 	ones, 	it 	is 	better 	to 	have 	molars
with 	pointed 	ends 	to 	cut 	through 	the 	softer 	food. 	It 	loosens
at 	much 	④ 	higher 	forces 	and 	breaks 	up 	far 	more 	quickly.
Modern 	huntergatherers 	spend 	far 	less 	time 	chewing 	their
food 	even 	than 	apes 	that 	eat 	relatively 	soft 	fruit; 	they 	chew
for 	less 	than 	an 	hour 	a 	day 	compared 	with 	five 	or 	six 	hours
for 	chimpanzees. 	This 	⑤ 	frees 	up 	plenty 	of 	time 	for 	other
tasks, 	such 	as 	looking 	after 	the 	fire, 	making 	a 	permanent
camp, 	toolmaking, 	or 	further 	foraging.
* 	molar: 	어금니 	** 	forage: 	식량을 	찾아다니다
[31~34] 	다음 	빈칸에 	들어갈 	말로 	가장 	적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
31. 	Learning 	is
constructive, 	not
destructive. 	This 	means 	we
don’t 	mental 	models 	― 	we 	simply 	expand 	upon
them. 	To 	understand 	what 	I 	mean, 	think 	back 	to 	your
childhood. 	There 	was 	likely 	a 	time 	when 	you 	believed 	in
Santa 	Claus; 	your 	mental 	model 	accepted 	him 	and 	your
predictions 	accounted 	for 	his 	existence. 	At 	some 	point,
however, 	you 	came 	to 	recognize 	he 	was 	fictitious 	and 	you
updated 	your 	mental 	model 	accordingly. 	At 	that 	moment, 	you
didn’t 	suddenly 	forget 	everything 	about 	Santa 	Claus. 	To 	this
day, 	you 	can 	still 	recognize 	him, 	speak 	of 	him 	and 	embrace
young 	children’s 	belief 	in 	him. 	In 	other 	words, 	you 	didn’t
destroy 	your 	old 	mental 	model, 	you 	simply 	added 	new
information 	to 	it. 	By 	building 	upon 	old 	mental 	models 	we 	are
able 	to 	maintain 	ties 	to 	the 	past, 	foster 	a 	deeper 	understanding
of 	concepts 	and 	develop 	an 	everexpanding 	pool 	of
information 	to 	draw 	upon 	in 	order 	to 	continually 	adapt 	to 	an
everevolving 	world.
* 	fictitious: 	가상의
① 	replace 	② 	imagine 	③ 	predict
④ 	analyze 	⑤ 	imitate
32. 	A 	commonality 	between 	conceptual 	and 	computer 	art 	was
. 	Conceptual 	artists 	decoupled
the 	relationship 	between 	the 	art 	object 	and 	artist 	by
mitigating 	all 	personal 	signs 	of 	invention. 	The 	artist 	became
detached 	from 	the 	idea 	of 	personalized 	draftsmanship 	by
installing 	a 	predetermined 	system 	― 	a 	type 	of 	instruction 	for
another 	to 	follow. 	That 	way 	there 	was, 	as 	Sol 	LeWitt 	states,
no 	“dependence 	on 	the 	skill 	of 	the 	artist 	as 	a 	craftsman.”
Effectively 	any 	person 	could 	carry 	out 	the 	instructions. 	The
same 	process 	was 	at 	work 	in 	computer 	art, 	where 	artists
devised 	a 	predetermined 	drawing 	algorithm 	for 	the 	computer
automaton 	to 	carry 	out 	the 	instruction. 	The 	human 	agent
initiated 	the 	conceptual 	form, 	and 	a 	machine 	actuated 	it.
Likewise, 	the 	computer 	artwork 	lacked 	any 	autographic 	mark,
trace 	of 	spontaneity, 	or 	artistic 	authenticity. 	The 	plotter 	arm
would 	replace 	the 	human 	arm 	in 	the 	production 	process. 	[3점]
* 	mitigate: 	완화하다 	** 	actuate: 	작동시키다
*** 	plotter: 	플로터(데이터를 	도면화하는 	출력 	장치)
① 	the 	suppression 	of 	authorial 	presence
② 	the 	rejection 	of 	meaningless 	repetition
③ 	the 	elevation 	of 	ordinary 	objects 	to 	art
④ 	the 	preference 	of 	simplicity 	to 	elaboration
⑤ 	the 	tendency 	of 	artists 	to 	work 	in 	collaboration

-- 5 of 8 --

6 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
6 8
33. 	Innate 	behaviors 	used 	for 	finding 	food, 	such 	as 	grazing,
scavenging, 	or 	hunting, 	are 	more 	dependent 	on 	learning 	than
behaviors 	used 	to 	consume 	food. 	Mating, 	nesting, 	eating, 	and
preykilling 	behaviors 	tend 	to 	be 	governed 	more 	by 	instinct.
The 	greater 	dependence 	on 	learning 	to 	find 	food 	makes
animals 	in 	the 	wild 	.
Behaviors 	used 	to 	kill 	or 	consume 	food 	can 	be 	the 	same 	in
any 	environment. 	Ernst 	Mayr, 	an 	evolutionary 	biologist, 	called
these 	different 	behavioral 	systems 	“open” 	or 	“closed” 	to 	the
effects 	of 	experience. 	A 	lion 	hunting 	her 	prey 	is 	an 	example
of 	an 	open 	system. 	The 	hunting 	female 	lion 	recognizes 	her
prey 	from 	a 	distance 	and 	approaches 	it 	carefully. 	Charles
Herrick, 	a 	neurobiologist, 	wrote, 	“the 	details 	of 	the 	hunt 	vary
every 	time 	she 	hunts. 	Therefore 	no 	combination 	of 	simple
reflex 	arcs 	laid 	down 	in 	the 	nervous 	system 	will 	be 	adequate
to 	meet 	the 	infinite 	variations 	of 	the 	requirements 	for
obtaining 	food.” 	[3점]
* 	scavenge: 	동물의 	사체를 	찾아 	다니다
** 	reflex 	arc: 	반사궁(충격이 	통과하여 	반사를 	형성하는 	신경 	경로)
① 	less 	cooperative 	with 	others 	in 	their 	community
② 	less 	focused 	on 	monitoring 	predators’ 	approaches
③ 	more 	intelligent 	to 	build 	their 	natural 	surroundings
④ 	more 	sensitive 	to 	visual 	information 	than 	any 	other 	stimuli
⑤ 	more 	flexible 	and 	able 	to 	adapt 	to 	a 	variety 	of 	environments
34. 	The 	revolution’s 	victorious 	party 	can 	claim 	to 	have 	resolved
the 	fundamental 	anomalies 	of 	the 	old 	paradigm 	and 	to 	have
renewed 	the 	prospects 	for 	successful 	research 	governed 	by
shared 	assumptions. 	Indeed, 	the 	new 	community 	typically
rewrites 	the 	textbooks, 	and 	retells 	its 	own 	history, 	to 	reflect
this 	point 	of 	view. 	But 	from 	the 	standpoint 	of 	the 	losers, 	or
even 	of 	those 	who 	look 	on 	impartially, 	such 	rewritings 	might
seem 	to 	mark 	change 	without 	any 	genuine 	claim 	to 	progress,
because 	there 	is 	no 	neutral 	standard 	by 	which 	to 	assess 	the
merits 	of 	the 	change. 	The 	resulting 	body 	of 	knowledge 	is 	in
any 	case 	not 	cumulative, 	since 	much 	of 	what 	was 	previously
known 	(or 	merely 	believed) 	had 	to 	be 	excluded 	without 	ever
having 	been 	conclusively 	refuted. 	One 	likewise 	cannot
plausibly 	talk 	about 	revolutionary 	reconstitutions 	of 	science
as 	aiming 	toward 	truth, 	for 	similarly, 	there 	can 	be 	no
. 	The 	available
justification 	of 	scientific 	knowledge 	after 	revolutions, 	couched 	in
new 	terms 	according 	to 	newly 	instituted 	standards, 	may 	well 	be
sufficient, 	but 	perhaps 	only 	because 	these 	standards 	and 	terms
are 	now 	inevitably 	our 	own. 	[3점]
* 	anomaly: 	변칙, 	이례 	** 	refute: 	반박하다
*** 	plausibly: 	그럴듯하게
① 	official 	connection 	between 	scientists 	and 	policy 	makers
② 	impartial 	formulation 	of 	standards 	for 	its 	assessment
③ 	incomplete 	terms 	to 	describe 	the 	reconstitutions
④ 	easy 	process 	to 	learn 	about 	new 	scientific 	theories
⑤ 	strong 	belief 	that 	scientific 	progress 	benefits 	everyone
35. 	다음 	글에서 	전체 	흐름과 	관계 	없는 	문장은?
The 	written 	word 	is 	the 	obvious, 	and 	easiest, 	place 	to 	start
when 	exploring 	local 	history, 	if 	only 	to 	see 	what 	has 	already
been 	written 	on 	the 	subject. 	Local 	history 	books 	have 	been
written 	for 	centuries 	and 	are 	very 	variable 	in 	quality. 	① 	These
books 	will 	certainly 	not 	mention 	your 	ancestor 	by 	name 	unless
they 	played 	a 	particularly 	prominent 	part 	in 	the 	development
of 	the 	locality 	in 	question. 	② 	However, 	they 	do 	provide
information 	about 	how 	a 	place 	changed 	over 	time, 	who 	the
major 	personalities 	were 	and 	the 	significant 	events 	that
occurred 	there; 	or 	at 	least 	those 	selected 	by 	the 	author 	for
inclusion. 	③ 	If 	the 	author 	is 	writing 	from 	his 	personal
experiences, 	he 	must 	be 	allowed 	to 	spend 	more 	energy 	on
adding 	creative 	twists 	to 	a 	story 	that 	already 	exists. 	④ 	Unless
a 	book 	is 	extremely 	large 	or 	the 	district 	chosen 	is 	very 	small,
then 	the 	author 	must 	choose 	very 	carefully 	what 	he 	is 	to
include 	and 	their 	priorities 	may 	not 	be 	the 	same 	as 	all 	their
readers. 	⑤ 	It 	is 	well 	worth 	reading 	some 	or 	preferably 	all 	of
the 	books 	written 	about 	a 	locality 	that 	your 	ancestors 	lived 	in.
[36~37] 	주어진 	글 	다음에 	이어질 	글의 	순서로 	가장 	적절한
것을 	고르시오.
36.
The 	desire 	to 	see 	and 	interact 	with 	animals, 	shaped 	as
it 	is 	by 	popular 	culture, 	can 	be 	a 	motivating 	factor 	for
travel, 	but 	negative 	perceptions 	of 	certain 	animals 	can
perform 	an 	entirely 	opposite 	role 	in 	discouraging 	people
from 	visiting 	some 	destinations.
(A) 	For 	example, 	there 	are 	a 	variety 	of 	tshirt 	and 	tea 	towel
designs 	which 	celebrate 	the 	dangerous 	animals 	that 	can
be 	encountered 	in 	Australia. 	This 	is 	a 	whimsical
reconfiguration 	of 	the 	perceived 	threat 	that 	these 	animals
pose 	to 	some 	tourists 	considering 	travel 	to 	this 	country.
(B) 	The 	harmful 	effects 	of 	animals 	on 	tourism 	experiences
has 	been 	the 	subject 	of 	analysis 	in 	a 	small 	number 	of
studies, 	but 	deaths 	or 	injuries 	caused 	by 	animals 	to
tourists 	are 	tiny 	in 	comparison 	to 	other 	causes 	such 	as
drowning 	and 	vehicular 	accidents.
(C) 	Nevertheless, 	the 	possibility 	that 	they 	might 	encounter 	a
dangerous 	animal 	such 	as 	shark 	or 	snake 	or 	catch 	a
disease 	such 	as 	malaria 	is 	sufficient 	to 	stop 	at 	least
some 	tourists 	from 	visiting 	destinations 	where 	such
threats 	exist. 	Sometimes 	this 	fear 	is 	turned 	into 	a
marketing 	opportunity.
* 	whimsical: 	기발한 	** 	reconfiguration: 	재구성
① 	(A) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	② 	(B) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(C)
③ 	(B) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	④ 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(B)
⑤ 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(A)

-- 6 of 8 --

고 	3 	영어 	영역 	7
7 8
37.
In 	the 	course 	of 	acquiring 	a 	language, 	children 	are
exposed 	to 	only 	a 	finite 	set 	of 	utterances. 	Yet 	they 	come
to 	use 	and 	understand 	an 	infinite 	set 	of 	sentences.
(A) 	Yet, 	they 	all 	arrive 	at 	pretty 	much 	the 	same 	grammar.
The 	input 	that 	children 	get 	is 	haphazard 	in 	the 	sense
that 	caretakers 	do 	not 	talk 	to 	their 	children 	to 	illustrate
a 	particular 	point 	of 	grammar. 	Yet, 	all 	children 	develop
systematic 	knowledge 	of 	a 	language.
(B) 	Thus, 	despite 	the 	severe 	limitations 	and 	variation 	in 	the
input 	children 	receive, 	and 	also 	in 	their 	personal
circumstances, 	they 	all 	develop 	a 	rich 	and 	uniform
system 	of 	linguistic 	knowledge. 	The 	knowledge 	attained
goes 	beyond 	the 	input 	in 	various 	ways.
(C) 	This 	has 	been 	referred 	to 	as 	the 	creative 	aspect 	of
language 	use. 	This 	‘creativity’ 	does 	not 	refer 	to 	the
ability 	to 	write 	poetry 	or 	novels 	but 	rather 	the 	ability
to 	produce 	and 	understand 	an 	unlimited 	set 	of 	new
sentences 	never 	spoken 	or 	heard 	previously. 	The
precise 	linguistic 	input 	children 	receive 	differs 	from
child 	to 	child; 	no 	two 	children 	are 	exposed 	to 	exactly
the 	same 	set 	of 	utterances. 	[3점]
* 	haphazard: 	무작위적인, 	되는 	대로의
① 	(A) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	② 	(B) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(C)
③ 	(B) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	④ 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(B)
⑤ 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(A)
[38~39] 	글의 	흐름으로 	보아, 	주어진 	문장이 	들어가기에 	가장
적절한 	곳을 	고르시오.
38.
The 	result 	was 	that 	we 	don’t 	always 	buy 	what 	we 	like
best, 	but 	when 	things 	have 	to 	happen 	quickly, 	we 	tend 	to
go 	for 	the 	product 	that 	catches 	our 	eye 	the 	most.
Often 	time, 	or 	lack 	of 	time, 	plays 	an 	important 	role 	in 	the
purchase 	of 	everyday 	products. 	Milica 	Milosavljevic 	and 	his
coworkers 	conducted 	an 	experiment 	looking 	at 	the
relationship 	between 	visual 	salience 	and 	the 	decision 	to
purchase. 	( 	① 	) 	They 	showed 	subjects 	15 	different 	food
items 	on 	fMRI, 	such 	as 	those 	we 	find 	in 	a 	candy 	vending
machine 	at 	the 	train 	station, 	that 	is, 	bars, 	chips, 	fruity
items, 	etc. 	( 	② 	) 	These 	were 	rated 	by 	the 	subjects 	on 	a
scale 	of 	1–15 	according 	to 	“favorite 	snack” 	to 	“don’t 	like 	at
all.” 	( 	③ 	) 	They 	were 	then 	presented 	in 	varying 	brightness
and 	time, 	with 	subjects 	always 	having 	to 	make 	a 	choice
between 	two 	products. 	( 	④ 	) 	If 	we 	are 	also 	distracted
because 	we 	are 	talking 	to 	someone, 	on 	the 	phone, 	or 	our
thoughts 	are 	elsewhere 	at 	the 	moment, 	our 	actual 	preference
for 	a 	product 	falls 	further 	into 	the 	background 	and 	visual
conspicuousness 	comes 	to 	the 	fore. 	( 	⑤ 	) 	Colors 	play 	an
important 	role 	in 	this.
* 	salience: 	두드러짐 	** 	fMRI: 	기능적 	자기 	공명 	영상
*** 	conspicuousness: 	눈에 	잘 	띔
39.
However, 	within 	British 	society 	not 	everybody 	would 	see
football 	as 	‘their’ 	game.
If 	we 	look 	at 	contemporary 	British 	‘culture’ 	we 	will
probably 	quickly 	conclude 	that 	sport 	is 	an 	important 	part 	of
the 	culture. 	In 	other 	words, 	it 	is 	something 	that 	many 	people
in 	the 	society 	share 	and 	value. 	( 	① 	) 	In 	addition, 	we 	would
also 	probably 	conclude 	that 	the 	most 	‘important’ 	sport 	within
British 	culture 	is 	football. 	( 	② 	) 	We 	would 	‘know’ 	this 	from
the 	evidence 	that 	on 	a 	daily 	basis 	there 	is 	a 	significant
amount 	of 	‘cultural’ 	activity 	all 	focused 	on 	football 	in 	terms
of 	the 	amount 	of 	people 	who 	play 	it, 	watch 	it, 	read 	about 	it
and 	talk 	about 	it. 	( 	③ 	) 	It 	could 	be 	argued 	from 	looking 	at
their 	‘cultural’ 	activities 	and 	habits, 	that 	people 	from 	a
middleclass 	background 	seem 	to 	prefer 	rugby 	over 	football,
or 	that 	more 	women 	play 	netball 	than 	football. 	( 	④ 	) 	Equally,
if 	you 	went 	to 	the 	USA 	and 	were 	talking 	about 	‘football’,
most 	people 	would 	assume 	you 	were 	talking 	about 	American
football 	rather 	than 	soccer. 	( 	⑤ 	) 	From 	this 	we 	can 	conclude
that 	different 	cultures 	produce 	different 	ways 	of 	understanding,
or 	evaluating, 	human 	activities 	such 	as 	sport.
40. 	다음 	글의 	내용을 	한 	문장으로 	요약하고자 	한다. 	빈칸 	(A),
(B)에 	들어갈 	말로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
As 	a social 	species, 	should 	we 	not 	all 	be 	synchronized and
therefore 	awake 	at 	the 	same 	time 	to 	promote 	maximal 	human
interactions? 	Perhaps 	not. 	Humans 	likely evolved 	to 	cosleep
as 	families 	or 	even 	whole tribes, 	not 	alone 	or 	as 	couples.
Appreciating 	this evolutionary 	context, 	the 	benefits 	of 	such
genetically 	programmed 	variation 	in 	sleep/wake 	timing
preferences 	can 	be 	understood. 	The 	night 	people 	in 	the 	group
would 	not 	be 	going 	to 	sleep 	until 	one 	or two 	a.m., 	and 	not
waking 	until 	nine 	or 	ten 	a.m. The 	morning 	people, 	on 	the
other 	hand, 	would 	have 	retired 	for 	the 	night 	at 	nine 	p.m. 	and
woken 	at 	five 	a.m. 	Consequently, 	the 	group 	as 	a 	whole 	is
only collectively 	vulnerable 	(i.e., 	every 	person 	asleep) for 	just
four 	rather 	than 	eight 	hours, 	despite 	everyone 	still 	getting 	the
chance 	for 	eight 	hours 	of sleep. 	That’s 	potentially 	a 	50 	percent
increase 	in 	survival 	fitness. 	Mother 	Nature 	would 	never 	pass 	on
a 	biological 	trait 	— 	here, 	the 	useful 	variability 	in 	when
individuals 	within 	a 	collective 	tribe 	go 	to 	sleep 	and 	wake 	up 	—
that 	could 	enhance 	the 	survival 	safety 	and 	thus 	fitness 	of 	a
species 	by 	this amount. 	And 	so 	she 	hasn’t.
* 	synchronize: 	동시성을 	갖게 	하다 	** 	vulnerable: 	취약한

Individuals 	have 	(A) 	in 	the 	time 	of 	the 	day 	when
they 	prefer 	to 	sleep 	and 	wake 	up, 	which 	could 	promote
their 	(B) 	as 	a 	group.
(A) 	(B)
① 	differences 	…… 	originality
② 	differences 	…… 	survivability
③ 	similarities 	…… 	cooperation
④ 	similarities 	…… 	adaptation
⑤ 	regularities 	…… 	mobility

-- 7 of 8 --

8 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
8 8
[41~42] 	다음 	글을 	읽고, 	물음에 	답하시오.
Generalization 	promotes 	cognitive 	economy, 	so 	that 	we
don’t 	focus 	on 	particulars 	that 	don’t 	matter. 	The 	great
Russian 	neuropsychologist 	Alexander 	Luria 	studied 	a 	patient,
Solomon 	Shereshevsky, 	with 	a 	memory 	impairment 	that 	was
the 	(a) 	opposite 	of 	what 	we 	usually 	hear 	about 	― 	Solomon
didn’t 	have 	amnesia, 	the 	loss 	of 	memories; 	he 	had 	what
Luria 	called 	hypermnesia 	(we 	might 	say 	that 	his 	superpower
was 	superior 	memory). 	His 	supercharged 	memory 	allowed
him 	to 	perform 	amazing 	feats, 	such 	as 	repeating 	speeches
word 	for 	word 	that 	he 	had 	heard 	only 	once, 	or 	complex
mathematical 	formulas, 	long 	sequences 	of 	numbers, 	and
poems 	in 	foreign 	languages 	he 	didn’t 	even 	speak. 	Before 	you
think 	that 	having 	such 	a 	fantastic 	memory 	would 	be 	great, 	it
came 	with 	a 	(b) 	cost: 	Solomon 	wasn’t 	able 	to 	form
abstractions 	because 	he 	remembered 	every 	detail 	as 	distinct.
He 	had 	particular 	trouble 	identifying 	people. 	From 	a
neurocognitive 	standpoint, 	every 	time 	you 	see 	a 	face, 	it 	is
(c) 	unlikely 	that 	it 	looks 	at 	least 	slightly 	different 	from 	the
last 	time 	― 	you’re 	viewing 	it 	at 	a 	different 	angle 	and
distance 	than 	before, 	and 	you 	might 	be 	encountering 	a
different 	expression. 	While 	you’re 	interacting 	with 	a 	person,
their 	face 	goes 	through 	a 	parade 	of 	expressions. 	Because
your 	brain 	can 	(d) 	generalize, 	you 	see 	all 	of 	these 	different
manifestations 	of 	the 	face 	as 	belonging 	to 	the 	same
person. 	Solomon 	couldn’t 	do 	that. 	As 	he 	explained 	to 	Luria,
(e) 	recognizing 	his 	friends 	and 	colleagues 	was 	nearly
impossible 	because 	“everyone 	has 	so 	many 	faces.”
* 	impairment: 	장애
41. 	윗글의 	제목으로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
① 	Face 	Recognition 	Technologies: 	Blessing 	or 	Not?
② 	The 	Faster 	You 	Memorize, 	the 	Faster 	You 	Forget
③ 	Generalization 	Can 	Be 	Both 	a 	Shortcut 	and 	a 	Trap!
④ 	The 	Flaw 	in 	Cognition 	Caused 	by 	Flawless 	Memory
⑤ 	Why 	It 	Gets 	Difficult 	to 	Remember 	Details 	As 	You 	Age
42. 	밑줄 	친 	(a)～(e) 	중에서 	문맥상 	낱말의 	쓰임이 	적절하지 	않은
것은? 	[3점]
① 	(a) 	② 	(b) 	③ 	(c) 	④ 	(d) 	⑤ 	(e)
[43~45] 	다음 	글을 	읽고, 	물음에 	답하시오.
(A)
Ignace 	Jan 	Paderewski, 	the 	famous 	composerpianist,
was 	scheduled 	to 	perform 	at 	a 	great 	concert 	hall 	in
America. 	It 	was 	an 	evening 	to 	remember 	― 	black 	tuxedos
and 	long 	evening 	dresses, 	a 	highsociety 	event. 	Present 	in
the 	audience 	that 	evening 	was 	a 	mother 	with 	her
nineyearold 	son. 	Tired 	of 	waiting, 	(a) 	he 	squirmed
constantly 	in 	his 	seat. 	His 	mother 	was 	in 	hopes 	that 	her
son 	would 	be 	encouraged 	to 	practice 	the 	piano 	if 	he 	could
just 	hear 	the 	great 	Paderewski 	at 	the 	keyboard. 	So,
against 	his 	wishes, 	he 	had 	come.
* 	squirm: 	꼼지락대다
(B)
The 	roar 	of 	the 	crowd 	became 	quiet 	as 	hundreds 	of
frowning 	faces 	pointed 	in 	(b) 	his 	direction. 	Irritated 	and
embarrassed, 	they 	began 	to 	shout: 	“Get 	that 	boy 	away
from 	there!” 	“Who’d 	bring 	a 	kid 	that 	young 	in 	here?”
“Where’s 	his 	mother?” 	“Stop 	(c) 	him!” 	Backstage, 	Paderewski
overheard 	the 	sounds 	out 	front 	and 	quickly 	put 	together
in 	his 	mind 	what 	was 	happening. 	Hurriedly, 	he 	grabbed
his 	coat 	and 	rushed 	toward 	the 	stage.
(C)
As 	she 	turned 	to 	talk 	with 	friends, 	her 	son 	could 	stay
seated 	no 	longer. 	(d) 	He 	slipped 	away 	from 	her 	side,
strangely 	drawn 	to 	the 	black 	concert 	grand 	piano 	and 	its
leather 	stool 	on 	the 	huge 	stage 	flooded 	with 	blinding
lights. 	Without 	much 	notice 	from 	the 	sophisticated 	audience,
the 	boy 	sat 	down 	at 	the 	piano 	stool, 	staring 	wideeyed 	at
the 	black 	and 	white 	keys. 	He 	placed 	his 	small, 	shaky
fingers 	in 	the 	right 	location 	and 	began 	to 	play
“Chopsticks.”
(D)
Without 	one 	word 	of 	announcement 	Paderewski 	bent
over 	behind 	the 	boy, 	reached 	around 	both 	sides, 	began 	to
improvise 	a 	countermelody 	to 	harmonize 	with 	and 	enhance
“Chopsticks.” 	As 	the 	two 	of 	them 	played 	together, 	(e) 	he
kept 	whispering 	in 	the 	boy’s 	ear: 	“Keep 	going. 	Don’t 	quit.
Keep 	on 	playing... 	don’t 	stop... 	don’t 	quit.” 	Together, 	the
old 	master 	and 	the 	little 	boy 	transformed 	an 	embarrassing
situation 	into 	a 	wonderfully 	creative 	experience. 	The
audience 	was 	mesmerized.
* 	improvise: 	즉흥 	연주하다 	** 	mesmerize: 	매혹하다
43. 	주어진 	글 	(A)에 	이어질 	내용을 	순서에 	맞게 	배열한 	것으로
가장 	적절한 	것은?
① 	(B) 	- 	(D) 	- 	(C) 	② 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(D)
③ 	(C) 	- 	(D) 	- 	(B) 	④ 	(D) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(C)
⑤ 	(D) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(B)
44. 	밑줄 	친 	(a)~(e) 	중에서 	가리키는 	대상이 	나머지 	넷과 	다른 	것은?
① 	(a) 	② 	(b) 	③ 	(c) 	④ 	(d) 	⑤ 	(e)
45. 	윗글에 	관한 	내용으로 	적절하지 	않은 	것은?
① 	소년은 	연주회에 	오고 	싶지 	않았으나 	오게 	되었다.
② 	짜증이 	나고 	당황한 	관중은 	크게 	소리치기 	시작했다.
③ 	Paderewski는 	서둘러 	무대로 	달려갔다.
④ 	소년은 	무대 	위 	피아노 	의자에 	앉아 	건반을 	응시했다.
⑤ 	Paderewski는 	짧은 	공지 	후 	소년과 	함께 	연주했다.
* 	확인 	사항
◦ 	답안지의 	해당란에 	필요한 	내용을 	정확히 	기입(표기)했는지 	확인
하시오.

-- 8 of 8 --

