1 8
1번부터 	17번까지는 	듣고 	답하는 	문제입니다. 	1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 	다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 계절별 꽃의 종류를 소개하려고
② 꽃꽂이 동호회 가입을 독려하려고
③ 정기적인 꽃 배송 서비스를 홍보하려고
④ 꽃을 신선하게 관리하는 법을 알리려고
⑤ 전문적으로 꽃을 가꾸는 사람을 모집하려고
2. 	대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 자녀의 인터넷 사용 시간을 제한해야 한다.
② 소셜 미디어는 자녀의 학업에 도움이 된다.
③ 소셜 미디어를 통한 영화 홍보는 효과적이다.
④ 온라인에서 사생활을 공유하는 것은 위험하다.
⑤ 소셜 미디어를 통해 자녀를 더 잘 이해할 수 있다.
3. 	다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 적성에 맞는 업무를 맡으면 직장에 대한 만족도가 높아진다.
② 세미나에 참여하는 것은 팀워크 향상에 효과가 있다.
③ 동료의 피드백은 업무 능력 향상에 도움이 된다.
④ 동료와의 과도한 경쟁은 업무 효율성을 떨어뜨린다.
⑤ 프로젝트를 잘 수행하기 위해서는 사전 계획이 필수적이다.
4. 	대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
5. 	대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 회의실 예약하기 	② 참가 인원 확인하기
③ 유인물 복사하기 	④ 음료 주문하기
⑤ 점심 메뉴 정하기
6. 	대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $54 	② $60 	③ $72 	④ $80 	⑤ $90
7. 	대화를 듣고, 남자가 Prime Travel Writing Contest에 참가할
수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 여행이 계획되어 있어서
② 결혼식에 참석해야 해서
③ 글쓰기 수업을 들어야 해서
④ 다른 대회에 참가해야 해서
⑤ 대회를 준비할 시간이 없어서
8. 	대화를 듣고, Starry Family Reading Night 행사에 관해 언급
되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 주제 	② 시작 시간 	③ 장소
④ 신청 방법 	⑤ 참가비
9. 	Wondrous Tastes 행사에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 3일 동안 진행된다.
② 한 개의 매장에서만 열린다.
③ 새로운 다섯 종류 도넛의 샘플이 제공된다.
④ 모든 방문객은 무료로 커피를 받는다.
⑤ 도넛 한 상자를 구매한 사람들은 할인 쿠폰을 받는다.
10. 	다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 주문할 연필꽂이를
고르시오.
Pencil Holders
Model 	Price 	Material 	Shape 	Phone Stand
① 	A 	$10 	plastic 	elephant 	☓
② 	B 	$10 	metal 	bear 	◯
③ 	C 	$15 	metal 	elephant 	◯
④ 	D 	$20 	wood 	bear 	☓
⑤ 	E 	$25 	wood 	bear 	◯
11. 	대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① I agree. Let’s look for another resort.
② How disappointing! The rooms are fully booked.
③ Congratulations! You did a good job at the conference.
④ That’s okay. I’m sure we can reschedule the conference.
⑤ What a relief! Now I don’t need to change the reservation.
12. 	대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m sorry. You’re on the wrong train.
② Good point. I’ll check the train schedule.
③ Don’t worry. The concert lasts less than one hour.
④ Hurry up! You’d better take a taxi rather than a train.
⑤ No problem. I’m glad to give you a ride to the concert.
2025학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1

-- 1 of 8 --

2
2 8
13. 	대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman :
① Why not? You can take my math class.
② I hope so. I’ll send him an email right away.
③ Probably not. He should’ve checked his message.
④ Certainly. Thanks for choosing me to be your guest.
⑤ That’s right. We’ve already invited a mathematician.
14. 	대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man :
① I see. Then I’ll come back with it later.
② Oh, no. I can’t find a pharmacy nearby.
③ That’s terrible. I hope you get well soon.
④ Of course. Relaxing is good for your eyes.
⑤ I’m not sure. You’d better try another medicine.
15. 	다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jason이 Kathy에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jason:
① Thanks for buying me a new pair of pants.
② You need to wash your car as quickly as possible.
③ Get the dust off your clothes before getting in the car.
④ Can you first take off your jacket when we get home?
⑤ Don’t forget to put on warm clothes before you go hiking.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 	남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① practical use of photography in various fields
② importance of choosing a practical field for research
③ applications of high-speed cameras in academic fields
④ sudden decline of photography in the contemporary era
⑤ how to take photographs effectively in specialized fields
17. 	언급된 분야가 아닌 것은?
① space science 	② biology 	③ medicine
④ psychology 	⑤ education
18. 	다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 새로 개설한 온라인 채널을 홍보하려고
② 온라인 생방송 날짜 변경을 공지하려고
③ 부적절한 댓글을 쓰지 않도록 요청하려고
④ 온라인 채널 구독 연령 제한을 고지하려고
⑤ 온라인 구독자들의 요청 사항을 공유하려고
19. 	다음 글에 드러난 Timothy의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Timothy sat at his desk, desperately turning the pages of his
science book. His science project was due in a few days and
he had no idea where to start. Finally, he closed his book, hit
the 	table, 	and 	shouted, 	“This 	is 	impossible!” 	His 	sister,
Amelia, drawn by the noise, came into his room. “Hey, little
brother, can I help?” Timothy explained his situation and
Amelia immediately had a solution. She knew that Timothy
enjoyed learning about environmental issues and suggested he
do a project about climate change. Timothy thought about the
idea and agreed that his sister was right. “Oh, Amelia, your
idea is fantastic! Thank you. You are the best sister ever!”
① frustrated → grateful 	② disappointed → envious
③ hopeful 	→ thrilled 	④ encouraged 	→ ashamed
⑤ fearful 	→ indifferent
20. 	다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
As the world seems to be increasingly affected by the
ever-expanding influence of machines in general and artificial
intelligence (AI) specifically, many begin to imagine, with
either fear or anticipation, a future with a diminished role for
human decision making. Whether it be due to the growing
presence of AI assistants or the emergence of self-driving cars,
the necessity of the role of humans as the decision makers
would appear to be in decline. After all, our capacity for
making mistakes is well documented. However, perhaps the
saving grace of human determination is to be found here as
well. 	Little 	evidence 	exists 	that 	suggests 	modern 	AI’s
infallibility or predicts it in the future. It is crucial that, in light
of humanity’s acceptance of our own fallibility, we utilize our
capacity to overcome such failures to position ourselves as the
overseers 	of 	AI’s 	own 	growth 	and 	applications 	for 	the
foreseeable future.
① 인간은 AI의 발전 가능성과 불안정성을 동시에 고려해야 한다.
② 인간은 창의력을 향상시키기 위해 AI에 의존하지 말아야 한다.
③ 실수를 보완하기 위해 인간은 AI의 활용 방안을 모색해야 한다.
④ AI에 대한 학습을 통해 인간은 미래 사회 변화에 대비해야 한다.
⑤ AI의 영향력 확산에 대비하여 인간은 오류 극복 능력을 활용해야 한다.
Hello, 	everyone! 	Welcome 	back 	to 	your 	favorite
online channel, With Ethan. As always, I’m trying to
make this channel a place that my followers of all ages
can enjoy. Recently, in the comments section, there have
been some examples of language that is inappropriate
for 	younger 	viewers. 	Also, 	there 	have 	been 	some
comments that are not relevant to this channel. These
kinds of comments are unacceptable for a channel like
this. I would really like to ask that all of my followers
keep these things in mind so that we can all enjoy this
channel. I always appreciate your time and support.
Please keep watching.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.

-- 2 of 8 --

3
3 8
21. 	밑줄 친 Burnout hasn’t had the last word.가 다음 글에서
의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
To balance the need for breadth (everyone feels a bit burned
out) and depth (some are so burned out, they can no longer do
their jobs), we ought to think of burnout not as a state but as a
spectrum. In most public discussion of burnout, we talk about
workers who “are burned out,” as if that status were black and
white. A black-and-white view cannot account for the variety
of burnout experience, though. If there is a clear line between
burned out and not, as there is with a lightbulb, then we have
no good way to categorize people who say they are burned out
but still manage to do their work competently. Thinking about
burnout as a spectrum solves this problem; those who claim
burnout but are not debilitated by it are simply dealing with a
partial or less-severe form of it. They are experiencing burnout
without being burned out. Burnout hasn’t had the last word.
* debilitate: 쇠약하게 하다
① Public discussion of burnout has not reached an end.
② There still exists room for a greater degree of exhaustion.
③ All-or-nothing criteria are applicable to burnout symptoms.
④ Exhaustion is overcome in different ways based on its severity.
⑤ Degrees of exhaustion are shaped by individuals’ perceptions.
22. 	다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
In both the ancient hunter-gatherer band and our intimate
speech communities today, the diffusion of speech shaped
values. The fact that everyone was going to be able to speak
and listen had to be accommodated ethically, and it was via a
rough egalitarianism. In terms of communications, people
were equal and therefore it was believed they should be equal,
or at least relatively so. By this code, ancient Big Men were
not allowed to act controllingly and modern office managers
are not allowed to silence anyone at will. Moreover, equal
access 	to 	speech 	and 	hearing 	promoted 	the 	notion 	that
property should be held in common, that goods and food in
particular should be shared, and that everyone had a duty to
take care of everyone else. This was probably more true
among hunter-gatherers than it is in the modern family, circle
of friends, or workplace. But even in these cases we believe
that sharing and mutual aid are right and proper. Remember, if
you bring something, you should bring enough for everyone.
* diffusion: 확산 	** egalitarianism: 인류 평등주의
① 수렵인과 현대인은 언어에 대한 유사한 가치를 가지고 있다.
② 인간은 언어를 사용하여 자원을 보다 효율적으로 배분해 왔다.
③ 현대 사회는 고대 수렵 사회보다 평등한 체계에 의해 운영된다.
④ 인간 의사소통의 평등성은 공유와 공조 가치 기반을 형성했다.
⑤ 인간은 의사소통을 통해 자원을 공유하는 평등한 사회를 건설했다.
23. 	다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
While many city shoppers were clearly drawn to the notion
of buying and eating foods associated with nature, the nature
claimed by the ads was no longer the nature that created the
foods. Indeed, the nature claimed by many ads was associated
with food products only by the ads’ attachment. This is clearly
a case of what French sociologist Henri Lefebvre has called
“the decline of the referentials,” or the tendency of words
under the influence of capitalism to become separated from
meaningful 	associations. 	Increasingly, 	food 	ads 	helped
shoppers become accustomed to new definitions of words
such as “fresh” and “natural,” definitions that could well be
considered opposite of their traditional meanings. The new
definitions better served the needs of the emerging industrial
food system, which could not supply foods that matched
customary meanings and expectations. And they better met
shoppers’ desires, although with pretense.
① decline of reliability in the ads of natural foods
② changes in the senses of words linked to food ads
③ influence of capitalism on the industrial food system
④ various ways to attract customers in the food industry
⑤ necessity of meaningful word associations in commercials
24. 	다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
As far back as 32,000 years ago, prehistoric cave artists
skillfully used modeling shadows to give their horses and
bison volume. A few thousand years ago ancient Egyptian and
then ancient Greek art presented human forms in shadow-style
silhouette. But cast shadows do not appear in Western art until
about 400 BCE in Athens. It was only after shadows had
become an established, if controversial, part of representation
that classical writers claimed that art itself had begun with the
tracing of a human shadow. Greeks and Romans were the first
to 	make 	the 	transition 	from 	modeling 	shadows 	to 	cast
shadows, a practice that implied a consistent light source, a
fixed 	point 	of 	view, 	and 	an 	understanding 	of 	geometric
projection. In fact, what we might now call “shadow studies”
― the 	exploration 	of 	shadows 	in 	their 	various 	artistic
representations ― has its roots in ancient Athens. Ever since,
the practice of portraying shadows has evolved along with
critical analysis of them, as artists and theoreticians have
engaged 	in 	an 	ongoing 	debate 	about 	the 	significance 	of
shadow representation.
* geometric: 기하학의
① The Journey of Shadows in Art from Prehistoric Caves Onward
② Portrayals of Human Shadows from the Artistic Perspective
③ Representing Shadows as a Key Part of Contemporary Art
④ What Are the Primary Challenges for Shadow Painters?
⑤ Unique Views on Shadows: From Cave Artists to Romans

-- 3 of 8 --

4
4 8
25. 	다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph, based on a survey conducted in 2023,
shows the share of respondents who say reading is one of their
personal hobbies according to their gender group in five
countries. ① Among the countries shown in the graph, Spain
had the largest share of females who said reading was one
of their hobbies, which was 58%. ② The gap between the
share of females and that of males who selected reading as
one of their hobbies was larger in Germany than in Mexico.
③ The share of males who selected reading as one of their
hobbies in Mexico was 41%, which was smaller than that in
the 	United 	States. ④ The 	share 	of 	females 	who 	selected
reading as one of their hobbies in the United States was larger
than that in South Korea. ⑤ As for South Korea, the share of
respondents who selected reading as one of their hobbies was
the smallest among the countries shown in the graph for each
gender, respectively.
26. 	Will Rogers에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Will Rogers (1879—1935) was a famous American public
figure. He was born as the eighth child. When he was young,
he was clever and mature but he dropped out of school after
the 10th grade. He was very interested in cowboys and horses,
and he even learned how to do rope tricks. He left the U.S. in
1902 and worked as a cowboy and roping artist in South
Africa and Australia. After returning to the U.S., he appeared
in more than 50 movies and was often heard on the radio as an
entertainer. He was also an outstanding newspaper columnist
with his wit and humor, writing more than 4,000 columns. He
unfortunately died at the height of his career in 1935. Rogers
was so popular that after his death his statue was installed in
the U.S. Capitol. He will be remembered as a great American
of many talents.
① 여덟 번째 아이로 태어났다.
② 카우보이와 말에 매우 관심이 있었다.
③ 미국에 돌아온 후 50편이 넘는 영화에 출연했다.
④ 뛰어난 신문 칼럼니스트였다.
⑤ 생전에 그의 동상이 U.S. Capitol에 설치되었다.
27. 	Summer Job at Wildlife Rescue Center에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Summer Job at Wildlife Rescue Center
We are looking for summer workers who will take care of
the animals rescued from Mount Donovahn.
Schedule
∙Dates: August 1st to 31st
∙Hours: 10 a.m.—4 p.m.
※ On rainy days, working hours may change.
Requirements
∙Only those aged 18 and over can apply.
∙Previous experience with animals
Tasks
∙Preparing food for animals and feeding them
∙Writing reports about animals
- Summer workers will get training from our caretakers.
- Free shuttle bus service will be provided twice a day.
To learn more about the summer job, please visit our website,
www.dwildliferescue.org.
① Mount Donovahn으로부터 구조된 동물을 돌본다.
② 우천 시 업무 시간이 변경될 수 있다.
③ 18세 이상만 지원할 수 있다.
④ 동물에 관한 보고서를 작성한다.
⑤ 무료 셔틀 버스 서비스가 하루에 세 번 제공된다.
28. 	LCU Geography Field Trip에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하는 것은?
① 2일 동안 진행된다.
② 모든 전공의 학생들이 참여할 수 있다.
③ A코스에서는 Lionsford Beach 해안의 특징을 조사한다.
④ 참가비에 점심이 포함되어 있다.
⑤ 지원서는 이메일로만 제출이 가능하다.
LCU Geography Field Trip
Lionsford City University is offering a one-day geography
field trip on June 17th. We believe it is one of the finest
field trips in the country.
Participants: First-year students majoring in geography
Course Options
A 	B
Exploring the landscape
while hiking Mount Belena
Examining coastal features
along Lionsford Beach
Participation Fee: $70 per person (lunch included)
How to Apply
∙Email the application to geography@lcu.edu or drop it
off at the department office.
∙Deadline: June 4th
※ For further information, please contact us at 607-223-2127.

-- 4 of 8 --

5
5 8
29. 	다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
What makes practicing retrieval so much better than review?
One answer comes from the psychologist R. A. Bjork’s concept
of desirable difficulty. More difficult retrieval ① leads to
better learning, provided the act of retrieval is itself successful.
Free recall tests, in which students need to recall as much as
they can remember without prompting, tend to result in better
retention than cued recall tests, in which students ② give hints
about what they need to remember. Cued recall tests, in turn,
are 	better 	than 	recognition 	tests, 	such 	as 	multiple-choice
answers, ③ where the correct answer needs to be recognized
but not generated. Giving someone a test immediately after
they learn something improves retention less than giving them
a slight delay, long enough so that answers aren’t in mind
when they need ④ them. Difficulty, far from being a barrier to
⑤ making retrieval work, may be part of the reason it does so.
* retrieval: 불러오기 	** retention: 보유력
30. 	다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
Internalization depends on supports for autonomy. Contexts
that use controlling strategies such as salient rewards and
punishments or evaluative, selfesteem-hooking pressures are
① least likely to lead people to value activities as their own.
This is not to say that controls don’t ② work to produce
behavior ― decades of operant psychology prove that they
can. It is rather that the more salient the external control over a
person’s behavior, the more the person is likely to be merely
externally 	regulated 	or 	introjected 	in 	his 	or 	her 	actions.
Consequently, the person does not ③ develop a value or
investment in the behaviors, but instead remains dependent on
external controls. Thus, parents who reward, force, or cajole
their child to do homework are more likely to have a child
who does so only when rewarded, cajoled, or forced. The
salience 	of 	external 	controls ④ drives 	the 	acquisition 	of
self-responsibility. Alternatively, parents who supply reasons,
show an emotional understanding of difficulties overcoming
problems, and use a ⑤ minimum of external incentives are
more likely to cultivate a sense of willingness and value for
work in their child.
* autonomy: 자율성 	** salient: 두드러진
*** introject: 투입하다
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. 	When 	trying 	to 	establish 	what 	is 	meant 	by 	digital
preservation, the first question that must be addressed is:
what are you actually trying to preserve? This is clear in
the analog environment where the information content is
inextricably fixed to the physical medium. In the digital
environment, the medium is not part of the 	. A bit
stream looks the same to a computer regardless of the media
it is read from. A physical carrier is necessary, but as long as
the source media can be read, bit-perfect copies can be made
cheaply and easily on other devices, making the preservation
of the original carrier of diminishing importance. As the
physical media that carry digital information are quite delicate
relative to most analog media, it is expected that digital
information will necessarily need to be migrated from one
physical carrier to another as part of the ongoing preservation
process. It is not the media itself but the information on the
media that needs to be preserved.
* inextricably: 풀 수 없게
① platform 	② storage
③ message 	④ challenge
⑤ transformation
32. 	Creativity is commonly defined as the production of
ideas 	that 	are 	both 	novel 	(original, 	new) 	and 	useful
(appropriate, feasible). Ideas that are original but not useful
are irrelevant, and ideas that are useful but not original are
unremarkable. While this definition is widely used in research,
an important aspect of creativity is often ignored: Generating
creative ideas rarely is the final goal. Rather, to successfully
solve problems or innovate requires one or a few good
ideas 	that 	really 	work, 	and 	work 	better 	than 	previous
approaches. This requires that people evaluate the products
of their own or each other’s imagination, and choose those
ideas that seem promising enough to develop further, and
abandon those that are unlikely to be successful. Thus, being
creative 	. In fact,
the ability to generate creative ideas is essentially useless if
these ideas subsequently die a silent death.
① does not stop with idea generation
② rarely originates from practical ideas
③ is often regarded as a shortcut to innovation
④ frequently gives way to unanticipated success
⑤ brings out tension between novelty and relevancy

-- 5 of 8 --

6
6 8
33. 	Because 	the 	environment 	plays 	a 	significant 	role 	in
aiding meaningful internal processes, subjective experience
and the environment act as a ‘coupled system.’ This coupled
system can be seen as a complete cognitive system of its
own. In this manner, subjective experience is extended into the
external 	environment 	and 	vice 	versa; 	the 	external
environment 	with 	its 	disciplinary 	objects 	such 	as
institutional laws and equipment becomes mental institutions
that 	. A subjectively
held belief attains the status of objectivity when the belief is
socially shared. That is, even if we are trained as hard-nosed
health 	care 	rationalists, 	or 	no-nonsense 	bureaucrats, 	or
data-driven scientists, research has shown that our decisions
are influenced by various institutional practices. They include
bureaucratic 	structures 	and 	procedures, 	the 	architectural
design of health care institutions, the rules of evidence and the
structure of allowable questions in a courtroom trial, the
spatial arrangement of kindergartens and supermarkets, and a
variety of conventions and practices designed to manipulate
our emotions. [3점]
* vice versa: 역으로 	** bureaucrat: 관료
① affect our subjective experience and solutions
② serve as advocates for independent decision-making
③ position social experience within the cognitive system
④ comprise subjective interpretations of the environment
⑤ facilitate the construction of our concept of subjectivity
34. 	Any attempt to model musical behavior or perception in a
general way is filled with difficulties. With regard to models
of perception, the question arises of whose perception we are
trying 	to 	model ― even 	if 	we 	confine 	ourselves 	to 	a
particular 	culture 	and 	historical 	environment. 	Surely 	the
perception 	of 	music 	varies 	greatly 	between 	listeners 	of
different levels of training; indeed, a large part of music
education 	is 	devoted 	to 	developing 	and 	enriching 	(and
therefore likely changing) these listening processes. While
this may be true, I am concerned here with fairly basic aspects
of perception ― particularly meter and key ― which I believe
are relatively consistent across listeners. Anecdotal evidence
suggests, for example, that most people are able to ‘‘find
the beat’’ in a typical folk song or classical piece. This is
not to say that there is complete uniformity in this regard ―
there may be occasional disagreements, even among experts,
as to how we hear the tonality or meter of a piece. But I
believe 	. [3점]
* anecdotal: 일화의
① our devotion to narrowing these differences will emerge
② fundamental musical behaviors evolve within communities
③ these varied perceptions enrich shared musical experiences
④ the commonalities between us far outweigh the differences
⑤ diversity rather than uniformity in musical processes counts
35. 	다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Avian song learning occurs in two stages: first, songs must
be memorized and, second, they must be practiced. In some
species these two events overlap, but in others memorization
can occur before practice by several months, providing an
impressive example of long-term memory storage. ① The young
bird’s initial efforts to reproduce the memorized song are
usually not successful. ② These early songs may have uneven
pitch, irregular tempo, and notes that are out of order or poorly
reproduced. ③ However, sound graphs of songs recorded over
several weeks or months reveal that during this practice period
the bird fine-tunes his efforts until he produces an accurate
copy of the memorized template. ④ An important idea to
emerge from the study of birdsong is that song learning is
shaped by preferences and limitations. ⑤ This process requires
hearing oneself sing; birds are unable to reproduce memorized
songs if they are deafened after memorization but before the
practice period.
* avian: 조류의
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
Wildfire is a natural phenomenon in many Australian
environments. The intentional setting of fire to manage the
landscape was practised by Aboriginal people for millennia.
(A) However, the pattern of burning that stockmen introduced
was unlike previous regimes. When conditions allowed,
they would set fire to the landscape as they moved their
animals out for the winter. This functioned to clear woody
vegetation and also stimulated new plant growth in the
following spring.
(B) Although 	grasses 	were 	the 	first 	kinds 	of 	plants 	to
recolonize the burnt areas they were soon succeeded by
further woody plants and shrubs. About the only strategy
to prevent such regrowth was further burning ― essentially
using fire to control the consequences of using fire.
(C) The young shoots were a ready food source for their
animals when they returned. However, the practice also
tended to reinforce the scrubby growth it was intended to
control.
* regime: 양식 	** scrubby: 관목이 우거진
①
③
⑤
(A)
(B)
(C)
－
－
－
(C)
(C)
(B)
－
－
－
(B)
(A)
(A)
②
④
(B)
(C)
－
－
(A)
(A)
－
－
(C)
(B)

-- 6 of 8 --

7
7 8
37.
There are a number of human resource management
practices 	that 	are 	necessary 	to 	support 	organizational
learning.
(A) Their role should be to assist, consult, and advise teams
on how best to approach learning. They must be able to
develop new mechanisms for cross-training peers ― team
members ― and new systems for capturing and sharing
information. To do this, human resource development
professionals must be able to think systematically and
understand how to promote learning within groups and
across the organization.
(B) For example, performance evaluation and reward systems
that reinforce long-term performance and the development
and sharing of new skills and knowledge are particularly
important. In addition, the human resource development
function may be dramatically changed to keep the emphasis
on continuous learning.
(C) In a learning organization, every employee must take the
responsibility for acquiring and transferring knowledge.
Formal training programs, developed in advance and
delivered according to a preset schedule, are insufficient to
address shifting training needs and encourage timely
information sharing. Rather, human resource development
professionals must become learning facilitators. [3점]
①
③
⑤
(A)
(B)
(C)
－
－
－
(C)
(C)
(B)
－
－
－
(B)
(A)
(A)
②
④
(B)
(C)
－
－
(A)
(A)
－
－
(C)
(B)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Continuous 	emissions 	measurement 	can 	be 	costly,
particularly where there are many separate sources of
emissions, and for many pollution problems this may be a
major disincentive to direct taxation of emissions.
Environmental taxes based directly on measured emissions
can, in principle, be very precisely targeted to the policy’s
environmental objectives. ( ① ) If a firm pollutes more, it
pays 	additional 	tax 	directly 	in 	proportion 	to 	the 	rise 	in
emissions. ( ② ) The polluter thus has an incentive to reduce
emissions in any manner that is less costly per unit of abatement
than the tax on each unit of residual emissions. ( ③ ) The great
attraction of basing the tax directly on measured emissions is
that the actions the polluter can take to reduce tax liability are
actions that also reduce emissions. ( ④ ) Nevertheless, the
technologies available for monitoring the concentrations and
flows of particular substances in waste discharges have been
developing rapidly. ( ⑤ ) In the future, it may be possible to
think of taxing measured emissions in a wider range of
applications.
* abatement: 감소 	** liability: 부담액
39.
This active involvement provides a basis for depth of
aesthetic processing and reflection on the meaning of the
work.
There are interesting trade-offs in the relative importance
of subject matter (i.e., figure) and style (i.e., background).
( ① ) In highly representational paintings, plays, or stories,
the focus is on subject matter that resembles everyday life and
the role of background style is to facilitate the construction of
mental models. ( ② ) Feelings of pleasure and uncertainty
carry the viewer along to the conclusion of the piece. ( ③ ) In
highly expressionist works, novel stylistic devices work in an
inharmonious 	manner 	against 	the 	subject 	matter 	thereby
creating 	a 	disquieting 	atmosphere. ( ④ ) Thus, 	when 	the
work is less “readable” (or easily interpreted), its departure
from conventional forms reminds the viewer or reader that an
“aesthetic attitude” is needed to appreciate the whole episode.
( ⑤ ) An ability to switch between the “pragmatic attitude” of
everyday life and an “aesthetic attitude” is fundamental to a
balanced life. [3점]
* aesthetic: 미학의 	** pragmatic: 실용주의의
40. 	다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
There is a tendency, once the dust of an emergency has
settled down, to seek the reduction of famine vulnerability
primarily in enhanced economic growth, or the revival of
the rural economy, or the diversification of economic
activities. The potential contribution of greater economic
success, if it involves vulnerable groups, cannot be denied.
At the same time, it is important to recognize that, no
matter how fast they grow, countries where a large part of
the 	population 	derive 	their 	livelihood 	from 	uncertain
sources cannot hope to prevent famines without specialized
entitlement protection mechanisms involving direct public
intervention. Rapid growth of the economy in Botswana,
or 	of 	the 	agricultural 	sector 	in 	Kenya, 	or 	of 	food
production in Zimbabwe, explains at best only a small part
of their success in preventing recurrent threats of famine.
The real achievements of these countries lie in having
provided direct public support to their populations in times
of crisis.
* famine: 기아 	** vulnerability: 취약
󰀻
Although economic growth can be somewhat 	(A) 	in
diminishing a country’s risk of famine, direct approaches
to helping the affected people play a(n) 	(B) 	role in
this process.
(A) 	(B) 	(A) 	(B)
① productive…… complicated 	② fruitful 	…… critical
③ dominant …… comprehensive 	④ restrictive…… appropriate
⑤ desirable …… cost-effective

-- 7 of 8 --

8
8 8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
If we understand critical thinking as: ‘the identification and
evaluation 	of 	evidence 	to 	guide 	decision-making’, 	then
ethical 	thinking 	is 	about 	identifying 	ethical 	issues 	and
evaluating these issues from different perspectives to guide
how to respond. This form of ethics is distinct from higher
levels of conceptual ethics or theory. The nature of an ethical
issue or problem from this perspective is that there is no clear
right or wrong response. It is therefore (a) essential that
students learn to think through ethical issues rather than
follow a prescribed set of ethical codes or rules. There is a
need 	to (b) encourage 	recognition 	that, 	although 	being
ethical is defined as acting ‘in accordance with the principles
of conduct that are considered correct’, these principles vary
both between and within individuals. What a person (c) values
relates to their social, religious, or civic beliefs influenced by
their formal and informal learning experiences. Individual
perspectives may also be context (d) dependent, meaning
that under different circumstances, at a different time, when
they are feeling a different way, the same individual may
make different choices. Therefore, in order to analyse ethical
issues and think ethically it is necessary to understand the
personal factors that influence your own ‘code of behaviour’
and how these may (e) coincide, alongside recognizing and
accepting that the factors that drive other people’s codes and
decision making may be different.
41. 	윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Critical Reasoning: A Road to Ethical Decision-making
② Far-reaching Impacts of Ethics on Behavioural Codes
③ Ethical Thinking: A Walk Through Individual Minds
④ Exploring Ethical Theory in the Eyes of the Others
⑤ Do Ethical Choices Always Take Priority?
42. 	밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은
것은? [3점]
① (a) 	② (b) 	③ (c) 	④ (d) 	⑤ (e)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Garcia stood outside Frontcountry Mall, waiting for his
brother, Jeff. Garcia’s band had been chosen to perform at the
welcoming ceremony for a large group of students from their
sister university in Singapore. Garcia was hoping to find the
perfect clothing for the performance. That was why (a) he
had asked Jeff to help him pick out new clothes. “I’m sorry.
I’m late because traffic was terrible,” Jeff apologized as he
arrived. “Don’t worry. I haven’t waited long,” Garcia replied
as they entered the lively shopping center.
(B)
The band performance was the first event of the ceremony.
The host introduced the band, and each member took their
place on stage. Garcia stood at the center of the stage. As he
started playing, everyone fell silent, fascinated by the music.
Garcia’s trumpet playing was flawless. When the band was
finished, the audience loudly cheered. After the show, Jeff
approached Garcia. “It was fantastic. I think that was the best
performance I’ve ever seen,” (b) he said. Garcia beamed
with joy at his brother’s praise.
(C)
Garcia felt good as he arrived at the concert hall for the
rehearsal wearing his new clothes. His confidence was,
however, quickly changed to nervousness when he thought
of how many 	people 	would 	be there. 	As 	the 	rehearsal
began, (c) he struggled with the rhythm, making several
mistakes. Tom, Garcia’s band mate, came over and put a
hand on Garcia’s back, saying, “Don’t worry, I’ll be right
behind (d) you.” He looked at his friend, took a deep breath
and started to feel much better.
(D)
“Aren’t these cool?” Garcia asked, pointing at a patterned
red shirt and yellow pants he had found in the store. “Um,
I think they’re a bit too colorful,” Jeff objected. Instead,
Jeff picked out a white shirt and black jeans. He asked the
store clerk, “Don’t you think these would look great on
(e) my brother?” The clerk stopped her work and looked
at the clothes, quickly agreeing with Jeff’s choice. Garcia
bought the recommended clothes, saying, “Maybe I’ll wear
these for tonight’s rehearsal, too.”
43. 	주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
①
③
⑤
(B)
(C)
(D)
－
－
－
(D)
(D)
(C)
－
－
－
(C)
(B)
(B)
②
④
(C)
(D)
－
－
(B)
(B)
－
－
(D)
(C)
44. 	밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) 	② (b) 	③ (c) 	④ (d) 	⑤ (e)
45. 	윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Jeff는 교통 체증 때문에 늦었다.
② Garcia는 환영식 공연 무대의 중앙에 섰다.
③ 밴드가 환영식 공연에서 연주를 마치자 관객은 환호했다.
④ Garcia는 리허설을 앞두고 긴장감을 느꼈다.
⑤ Garcia는 본인이 가리킨 색상의 옷을 구매했다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

-- 8 of 8 --

