1 8
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 15번
까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 들려줍니다.
방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 내년에 새로 개설되는 과목을 홍보하려고
② 영상 제작 시 유의해야 할 사항을 안내하려고
③ 교육 과정 박람회의 변경된 일정을 공지하려고
④ 학교 홍보 영상의 온라인 제출 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 교육 과정 박람회를 위한 자원봉사자를 모집하려고
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 서늘한 곳에 화장품을 보관해야 한다.
② 유효 기간 내 화장품을 사용해야 한다.
③ 화장품 구매 시 성분을 확인해야 한다.
④ 화장 도구를 정기적으로 세척해야 한다.
⑤ 자외선 차단제를 사계절 내내 발라야 한다.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 어려운 일을 먼저 처리하면 생산성을 향상시킬 수 있다.
② 적절한 휴식은 업무 진행의 효율성을 증진시킬 수 있다.
③ 성공을 위해서는 과제를 완수하려는 태도가 필요하다.
④ 매일 실천하는 작은 일이 평생 지속되는 습관이 된다.
⑤ 할 일 목록 작성은 체계적인 일 처리에 도움이 된다.
4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
①
②
③
⑤
④
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 촬영 자세 검색하기 	② 문자 메시지 보내기
③ 조원들 분장시키기 	④ 의상 대여하기
⑤ 소품 주문하기
6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $45 	② $50 	③ $55 	④ $60 	⑤ $65
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 프리 다이빙 체험을 할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 물을 무서워해서
② 가족여행을 가야 해서
③ 체육 보고서를 써야 해서
④ 체험권에 당첨되지 않아서
⑤ 야구 경기를 관람해야 해서
8. 대화를 듣고, Fusion of Code and Canvas 전시회에 관해 언급되지
않은 것을 고르시오.
① 작품 수 	② 장소 	③ 휴관일
④ 전시 기간 	⑤ 입장료
9. 2024 May Dog Festival에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는
것을 고르시오.
① 2021년에 처음 개최되었다.
② 시청 앞 광장에서 열릴 것이다.
③ 놀이터 입장 시 주인이 반려견과 함께해야 한다.
④ 무료 셀프 사진 부스가 마련되어 있을 것이다.
⑤ 벼룩시장에서 수제 개 장난감을 구매할 수 없다.
10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문할 마사지 도구를
고르시오.
Massage Tools
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No problem. You can leave it to me.
② Too late. The meeting is already over.
③ Of course. You can use free wifi in the room.
④ I’m sorry. We have no record of your reservation.
⑤ Not really. It takes two hours for us to get there.
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Why not? The area is a popular tourist destination.
② Not yet. We haven’t decided where to go on a trip.
③ My mistake. I’ll change the tickets for the correct date.
④ That’s okay. I can get to the train station by myself.
⑤ I apologize. All the tickets for today are sold out.
2024학년도 5월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역
제 3 교시 	1
Product 	Price TargetUse
Body Part Material 	Free Gift
A 	$8 	Head 	Metal 	Pouch	①
B 	$10 	Face 	Ceramic 	Aroma oil	②
C 	$12 	Feet 	Rubber 	Pouch	③
D 	$16 	Back 	Wood 	Aroma oil	④
E 	$22 	Whole body 	Plastic 	Massage cream	⑤

-- 1 of 8 --

2 	영어 영역
2 8
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① I agree. I have to make a complaint.
② You’re right. Let’s learn to ride a bicycle.
③ That’s true. I’m still waiting for it to be found.
④ Good idea. I’ll give it a shot and see if it helps.
⑤ Absolutely. That’s why you should bike to work.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Awesome. Let’s go to the shop and get a hanbok.
② Look at me. It seems hanbok really suits me well.
③ One moment. Let’s find out how to download a travel app.
④ No worries. I’ll look for ways to get a discount for the class.
⑤ Right. This is the clothing the royal family wore in the past.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ms. Kim이 Taylor에게 할 말로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오. [3점]
Ms. Kim:
① You need to keep your audience focused during a show.
② You’d better practice harder to be on the school stage.
③ You should apply for an audition on a TV talent show.
④ Why don’t you memorize the song for the audition?
⑤ How about singing in the upcoming school festival?
[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① impacts of cultural traits on conflict situations
② traits that attract readers in heroic characters
③ strategies for teaching character traits in literature
④ reasons why personality traits matter in writing an epic
⑤ changes to traits that have defined heroes through history
17. 언급된 특성이 아닌 것은?
① courage 	② strength 	③ leadership
④ intelligence 	⑤ selflessness
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
My name is Rohan Kaul, the producer of the upcoming film
‘Upagrah.’ I am reaching out to you regarding a matter of
importance concerning the shooting of some scenes for our
film. We have identified Gulab Park, Mumbai, as an ideal
location for these scenes. We are hoping to conduct this
shoot on 3rd June 2024, from 1 p.m. to 6 p.m. We have
chosen Monday for the shooting day to minimize traffic
issues and disruption to the public. During the shoot, our
team promises to follow all rules and regulations, ensuring no
inconvenience is caused to the public. We would be so
grateful if you granted permission for the shoot so that we
can put the beautiful scenery of the park in our film. We look
forward to your response.
① 주말 영화 시사회에 초대하려고
② 공원 이용 시간의 연장을 건의하려고
③ 촬영을 위한 장비 대여 방법을 문의하려고
④ 행사 운영을 위한 교통 통제를 요청하려고
⑤ 영화 촬영을 위해 장소 사용 허가를 얻으려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Charles의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Charles was taking a quiz in his math class. He stared at the
questions, but they looked completely unfamiliar. Charles flipped
through the pages of the quiz for a while. His palms grew sweaty
as he realized that he didn’t know a single answer. A moment
later, a few other students began raising their hands. One said, “I
don’t think we ever learned about the stuff on this quiz, Mrs.
Smith.” The teacher quickly looked over a copy of the quiz and
announced, “I’m sorry, class. It appears that I have given you the
wrong quiz by mistake. We’ll take the right quiz next class.” As
Charles heard what the teacher said, the tension in his shoulders
began to melt away.
① nervous → relieved 	② relaxed 	→ regretful
③ amazed → annoyed 	④ indifferent → satisfied
⑤ shocked → sympathetic
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
When you are middleaged, the risk of connective tissue
injuries 	peaks 	as 	decreased 	load 	tolerance 	combines 	with
continued high activity levels. The path of least resistance is to
stop doing the things that hurt ― avoid uncomfortable movements
and find easier forms of exercise. However, that’s the exact
opposite of what you should do. There is a path forward. But it
doesn’t involve following the typical pain management advice of
rest, ice, and medicine, which multiple reviews have shown is not
effective for treating agerelated joint pain and dysfunction.
These methods do nothing more than treat superficial symptoms.
The only practical solution is to strengthen your body with
muscle training. Whether you’ve been training for a few years or
a few decades, or haven’t ever stepped foot in the weight room,
it’s not too late to restore your body, build real strength, and
achieve your physical potential.
① 관절의 노화를 늦추기 위해 적절한 체중을 유지해야 한다.
② 근육을 강화하기 위해 다양한 강도의 운동을 병행해야 한다.
③ 중년층은 근 손실 예방을 위해 식단을 철저히 관리해야 한다.
④ 노화와 관련된 관절 질환에는 치료보다 예방이 우선되어야 한다.
⑤ 중년에는 통증이 따르더라도 근력 운동으로 신체를 강화해야 한다.

-- 2 of 8 --

3	영어 영역
3 8
21. 밑줄 	친 	Approximate 	perfection 	is 	better 	than 	perfect
perfection이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Turn the lights out and point the beam of a small flashlight up
into one of your eyes. Shake the beam around while moving your
gaze up and down. You should catch glimpses of what look like
delicate branches. These branches are shadows of the blood
vessels that lie on top of your retina. The vessels constantly cast
shadows 	as 	light 	streams 	into 	the 	eye, 	but 	because 	these
shadows never move, the brain ceases responding to them.
Moving 	the 	flashlight 	beam around 	shifts the 	shadows just
enough 	to 	make 	them momentarily visible. 	Now you 	might
wonder if you could cause an image to fade just by staring at
something unmoving. But that is not possible because the visual
system constantly jiggles the eye muscles, which prevents the
perfect 	stabilization of 	images of 	the 	world. 	These 	muscle
movements are unbelievably small, but their effect is huge.
Without them, we would go blind by tuning out what we see
shortly 	after 	fixating 	our 	gaze! 	It’s 	an 	interesting 	notion:
Approximate perfection is better than perfect perfection.
* retina: 망막 	** jiggle: 가볍게 흔들다
① What makes your vision blurry actually protects your eyes.
② The more quickly an object moves, the more sensitively eyes react.
③ Eyes exposed to intense light are subject to distortion of images.
④ Constant adjustment of focusing makes your eye muscles tired.
⑤ Shaky eyemuscle movements let us see what the brain might ign ore.
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Most opposition to wilderness preservation doesn’t come from
environmentalists but from corporate interests and developers.
When wild places are designated as wilderness, they are closed to
most 	commercial 	activities 	and 	residential 	or 	infrastructure
development. 	There is thus frequently an economic cost 	to
wilderness preservation. Some critics claim that when wilderness
and economic interests clash, economic interests should normally
prevail. This argument, even if it is sound, won’t exclude all
wilderness preservation efforts, because some wilderness areas
have 	little 	economic 	value. 	But 	a 	deeper 	problem with 	the
argument is that it views nature from a humanfocused and
excessively 	economic 	point 	of 	view. 	Allowing 	economic
considerations to outweigh all other forms of value is inconsistent
with the biocentric reasons that support wilderness preservation.
Thus, while it certainly makes sense to weigh the economic costs
of wilderness protection, especially when such costs are high, the
biocentric 	values 	underlying 	wilderness 	preservation 	exclude
viewing economic considerations as the most important.
① 야생 보호 구역 보존의 생명 중심적 가치는 경제적 고려에 우선한다.
② 자연과의 공존을 고려한 상업 활동이 기업에 경제적 이익을 가져다준다.
③ 야생 보호에 있어 우선적으로 고려하는 가치는 문화에 따라 다양하다.
④ 야생 보호는 경제적 가치와 상관없이 모든 생물에 똑같이 적용된다.
⑤ 야생의 보호와 회복을 위한 비용 부담은 공동체 모두의 몫이다.
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
During the day, a molecule called adenosine builds up in your
brain. Adenosine binds with receptors on nerve cells, or neurons,
slowing down their activity and making you feel drowsy. But
caffeine is also able to bind with these receptors, and by doing so
it blocks adenosine’s effect, making your neurons fire more and
keeping you alert. Caffeine also activates a gland at the base of
your brain. This releases hormones that tell the adrenal glands on
your kidneys to produce adrenaline, causing your heart to beat
faster and your blood pressure to rise. If, however, your daily
caffeine intake is consistent, your brain will adapt to it. Your
brain is like, ‘Okay, every morning I’m getting this caffeine that’s
binding to these receptors and blocking adenosine from binding to
them.’ So your brain creates extra receptors to give adenosine
more of an opportunity to bind with them and have its usual
effect. And more adenosine is also produced to counteract the
caffeine. That’s why it takes more and more caffeine to have the
same effect.
* drowsy: 나른한 ** gland: (분비)선
① what your brain does for regular hormone production
② consequences of sleep deprivation caused by caffeine
③ connection between brain health and hormone balance
④ efforts to overcome the constant temptation of caffeine
⑤ how your brain adapts to a steady caffeine consumption
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
When viewed from space, one of the Earth’s most commanding
features is the blueness of its vast oceans. Small amounts of
water do not indicate the color of these large bodies of water;
when pure drinking water is examined in a glass, it appears clear
and colorless. Apparently a relatively large volume of water is
required to reveal the blue color. Why is this so? When light
penetrates water, it experiences both absorption and scattering.
Water molecules strongly absorb infrared and, to a lesser degree,
red light. At the same time, water molecules are small enough to
scatter shorter wavelengths, giving water its bluegreen color.
The amount of longwavelength absorption is a function of depth ;
the deeper the water, the more red light is absorbed. At a depth
of 15m, the intensity of red light drops to 25% of its original
value and falls to zero beyond a depth of 30m. Any object viewed
at this depth is seen in a bluegreen light. For this reason, r ed
inhabitants of the sea, such as lobsters and crabs, appear black to
divers not carrying a lamp.
* penetrate: 관통하다 	** infrared: 적외선
① We Should Go Green with the Ocean Exploration
② Various Tones of Water Our Deceptive Eyes Show Us
③ How DeepSea Microorganisms Affect the Ocean’s Color
④ Why So Blue: The Science Behind the Color of Earth’s Oceans
⑤ The Bigger Volume Water Has, the Lower Temperature It Gets

-- 3 of 8 --

4 	영어 영역
4 8
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the percentage of preferable chatbot
platforms by age categorized by Generation Z, Millennials, and
Generation X. ① Millennials and Generation X had the highest
percentage 	of 	respondents 	who 	preferred 	Desktop 	Websites
while Generation Z had the highest percentage for Messenger
Apps. ② In Generation Z, the percentage of respondents who
preferred Mobile Apps was more than twice that of those who
preferred Voice Assistant Devices. ③ Messenger Apps was the
only platform where the percentage of respondents’ preference
for it sank lower and lower from Generation Z, to Millennials, to
Generation X. ④ The percentage point gap between Millennial
and Generation X respondents who preferred Mobile Apps was
larger than the percentage point gap between the same two
groups 	for 	Voice 	Assistant 	Devices. 	⑤ The 	percentage 	of
respondents who preferred Mobile Websites was the lowest in all
the age groups.
26. José Saramago에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
José Saramago was born in 1922 to a family of farmers in a
little village north of Lisbon. For financial reasons he abandoned
his highschool studies and worked as a mechanic. At this time,
he acquired a taste for reading and started to frequent a public
library in Lisbon in his free time. After trying different jobs in
the civil service, he worked for a publishing company for twelve
years and then as an editor of the newspaper ‘Diário de Notícias.’
Between 	1975 	and 	1980 	Saramago 	supported 	himself 	as 	a
translator, but after his literary successes in the 1980s he
devoted himself to his own writing. He achieved worldwide
recognition in 1982 with the humorous love story
Baltasar and
Blimunda, 	a 	novel 	set 	in 	18th century 	Portugal. 	Saramago’s
oeuvre totals 30 works, and comprises not only novels but also
poetry, essays and drama.
* oeuvre: 전체 작품
① 재정적인 이유로 고등학교 공부를 그만두었다.
② 독서에 흥미가 생겨 공립 도서관을 자주 방문하기 시작했다.
③ 신문사의 편집자로 일한 후 출판사에서 12년간 일했다.
④ 포르투갈이 배경인 소설로 세계적인 인정을 받았다.
⑤ 소설뿐 아니라 시, 수필, 희곡 또한 집필하였다.
27. Scottish Day Trip Package에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
Scottish Day Trip Package
Don’t miss the chance to soak up the spirit of Scotland!
A fullday trip through the Highlands is waiting for you.
Schedule
∙ Departs at 7 a.m. from the Highland Tours office
∙ Returns around 9 p.m. to the original departure point
Details
∙ Max of 40 people per group
∙ Minimum age: 5 years old
∙ Price: $150 per person
Booking
∙ Only online booking is available.
∙ You will receive an email once your booking is confirmed.
∙ For a refund, cancel at least two days before the tour
departs.
Note
∙ The tour will not hold back for tourists who arrive at the
departure point late.
① 출발하는 장소와 돌아오는 장소가 같다.
② 한 그룹당 40명까지 참여할 수 있다.
③ 예약이 확정되면 이메일을 받을 것이다.
④ 환불을 위해서는 출발 하루 전까지 취소해야 한다.
⑤ 출발지에 늦게 도착하는 여행자를 기다려 주지 않는다.
28. Jr. Chef Class에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
JR. CHEF CLASS
with Chef Scott Gomez
Professional Chef Scott Gomez offers cooking classes to
provide your children with handson experience and happy
memories. He has picked pizza for the menu this week.
Details
쉞 Date: Tuesday, May 14th, 2024
쉞 Place: Rosehill Community Center Cafeteria
쉞 Available for children ages 6 - 12
Cost
쉞 $20 per child includes all ingredients, chef hat and apron.
Schedule
Note
쉞 Call 876-725-7501 to register.
쉞 A parent or guardian must stay on site during class.
쉞 Since parking space is limited, using public transportation
is recommended.
Time 	Contents
5:00 - 5:20 p.m. 	rolling pizza dough
5:20 - 6:00 p.m. 	topping and baking
6:00 - 6:30 p.m. 	plating and serving
① 이번 주의 메뉴는 아이들이 택한다.
② 비용에는 앞치마가 포함되지 않는다.
③ 피자 반죽 밀기는 30분간 진행된다.
④ 부모 혹은 보호자는 수업 동안 현장에 머물러야 한다.
⑤ 충분한 주차 공간이 확보되어 있다.

-- 4 of 8 --

5	영어 영역
5 8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
When a new pathogen emerges, one way it transitions from
wherever it has been living into a new host may be the acquisition
of new traits. Imagine that in ① its hourly struggle to survive
over long periods of time and many generations, a fungus species
might 	acquire 	a 	protective 	capsule ― a 	bit 	of 	coating ― that
shields it or even masks it from other microbes or cells. Then it
acquires some enzymes that enable it to survive ② whatever
chemicals other microbes might throw at it. If it can overcome
these chemicals, it may also overcome the same or similar
chemicals ③ used as antifungal drugs. Maybe it also evolves to
tolerate warmer temperatures. Now we’ve got a yeast that once
made its home in an apple tree or in a wetland but ④ that at this
point can live quite happily in our body, hide from our immune
system, and disarm our drugs. Then some of us carry it from one
country to another and then another, and eventually it finds a host
in a hospital patient who has recently received an organ transplant
or ⑤ are elderly with a weakened immune system.
* pathogen: 병원균 	** enzyme: 효소 	*** yeast: 효모
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은
것은? [3점]
Memory is shaped by emotions connected to an experience. For
this reason, inaccuracies often ① hide the full picture of what
happened. 	For 	example, 	a 	company 	might 	decide 	to 	hire 	a
consultant to assist with a major project. During this project, the
consultant demonstrated some personality traits that clashed with
a couple of the executives involved. Through the course of the
project, they were able to put aside the personality ② conflicts in
order to see their vision become a reality. Ultimately, the project
was a success, enabling the company to move forward and profit.
At a later date, the company, remembering the previous success,
expressed an ③ interest in hiring the same consultant for another
large project. The executives who struggled with his personality
last time may most vividly remember their difficulty in overcoming
his personality and related emotions. In this case, the success of
the project fades into the background as they focus on their
previous experience, colored by their feelings of ④ discomfort. As
a result, they convince the company to ⑤ rehire the consultant,
making project completion more difficult.
[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. As colors came to take on meanings and cultural significance
within societies, attempts were made to 	their use.
The 	most 	extreme 	example 	of 	this 	phenomenon 	was 	the
sumptuary laws. While these were passed in ancient Greece and
Rome, and examples can be found in ancient China and Japan,
they 	found 	their 	fullest 	expressions 	in 	Europe 	from 	the
midtwelfth century, before slowly disappearing in the early
modern period. Such laws could touch on anything from diet to
dress and furnishings, and sought to enforce social boundaries by
encoding the social classes into a clear visual system: the
peasants, in other words, should eat and dress like peasants;
craftsmen should eat and dress like craftsmen. Color was a vital
signifier in this social language ― dull, earthy colors like russet
were explicitly confined to the poorest rural peasants, while
bright ones like scarlet were the preserve of a select few.
① export 	② restrict
③ conceal 	④ liberate
⑤ tolerate
32. John Douglas Pettigrew, a professor of psychology at the
University of Queensland, found that the brain manages the
external 	world 	by 	dividing 	it 	into 	separate 	regions, 	the
peripersonal and the
	extrapersonal ― basically, near and far.
Peripersonal space includes whatever is in arm’s reach; things
you can control right now by using your hands. This is the world
of 	what’s 	real, 	right 	now. 	Extrapersonal 	space 	refers 	to
everything else ― whatever you can’t touch unless you move
beyond your arm’s reach, whether it’s three feet or three million
miles 	away. 	This 	is 	the 	realm 	of 	possibility. 	With 	those
definitions in place, another fact follows, obvious but useful: any
interaction in the extrapersonal space must occur in the future.
Or, to put it another way, 	. For
instance, if you’re in the mood for a peach, but the closest one is
sitting in a bin at the corner market, you can’t enjoy it now. You
can only enjoy it in the future, after you go get it.
① distance is linked to time
② the past is out of your reach
③ what is going to happen happens
④ time doesn’t flow in one direction
⑤ our brain is attracted to near objects

-- 5 of 8 --

6 	영어 영역
6 8
33. Insecteating plants’ unique strategies for catching live prey
have long captured the public imagination. But even within this
strange group, in which foodtrapping mechanisms have evolved
multiple times independently, some unusual ones stand out.
According to Ulrike Bauer, an evolutionary biologist, the visually
striking 	pitcher 	plant
	Nepenthes 	gracilis, 	for 	example, 	can
. 	This 	species’
pitcher has a rigid, horizontal lid with an exposed underside that
produces nectar, luring insects to land on it. When a raindrop
strikes the lid’s top, the lid jolts downward and throws any
unsuspecting visitor into digestive juices below. Researchers
used xray scans to analyze cross sections of the pitchers when
the lid is raised, lowered, and in a neutral position. Their results
revealed a structural weak point in the pitcher’s neck: when a
raindrop hits the lid, the weak spot folds in and forces the lid to
quickly move downward, similar to a diving board. The weak
point makes the pitcher’s body bend and bounce back in a
specific, 	consistent 	way, 	so 	the 	lid 	rises 	back 	up 	without
bouncing too far ― unlike a typical leaf’s chaotic vibration when
struck by rain. [3점]
* pitcher: 주머니 모양의 잎 	** nectar: (식물의) 꿀
*** jolt: 덜컹거리다, 흔들리다
① exploit external energy for a purpose
② hide itself with help of the environment
③ coordinate with other plants to trap insects
④ change its shape to absorb more rain water
⑤ modify its hunting strategy on a regular basis
34. Many fish generate their own light in a biological firework
display called bioluminescence. The lanternfish creates beams
that sweep the sea like headlamps. The dragonfish produces
wavelengths that only it can see, leaving its victims unaware of
the approaching threat. In contrast, the anglerfish hopes its prey
will notice and be lured toward its rodlike bioluminescent
barbel; 	its 	fierce 	jaws 	stay 	hidden 	in 	the 	shadows.
Bioluminescence is also used to frustrate predators. A species
from the spookfish family relies on a bellyful of symbiotic,
glowing bacteria to save it from becoming a meal. It uses the
same concept developed by the US Navy during World War II to
make bomber aircraft difficult to see. Just as Project Yehudi
designed planes with underwing spotlights, the fish’s glowing
belly conceals its silhouette against sunlight to hide it from
watching eyes below. In this fisheatfish world, survival is
. [3점]
* barbel: (물고기의) 수염 	** symbiotic: 공생의
① dependent upon communication within the same species
② a game of hideandseek that prioritizes the sense of sight
③ up to the ability to detect the subtle dance of sound waves
④ a competition to imitate the illumination of different species
⑤ a war where wider vision means better chances to catch prey
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
The human race traces back to a surprisingly small number of
common ancestors. It has been documented that the entire human
race can be traced back to only seven different mothers, and one
of these women is a common ancestor to roughly 40% of the
human species. Why is this? The simple answer is that humans are
extremely good at dying and at wiping each other out. ① History
has had many successful rulers and conquerors who have got rid
of entire populations, and even beyond that, our species has
wiped out plenty of similar humanoid lines that existed on this
earth. ② Scientific finds have so far discovered a number of other
humanoid species that once shared the earth with us, some of
which include Neanderthals and Denisovans. ③ There are still no
clear 	examples 	of 	Neanderthals 	attempting 	to 	expressively
symbolize reallife elements such as animals or people in creat ive
works. ④ Yet of these lines, only homo sapiens have survived,
only the modern humans. ⑤ That itself shows how difficult it is
for a species to survive and thrive longterm on this planet.
* humanoid: 인간에 가까운
[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
36.
Philosophers who seek to understand the nature of time
might consider the possibility of time travel. But there are no
reallife cases of time travel.
(A) It seems that something must happen to prevent you from doing
this, because if you were to succeed, you would not exist and so
you would not have been able to go back in time. As a result of
thinking through these sorts of cases, some philosophers claim
that the very notion of time travel makes no sense.
(B) In situations such as this, philosophers often construct thought
experiments ― imagined scenarios that bring out the thoughts
and presuppositions underlying people’s judgments. Sometimes
these scenarios are drawn from books, movies, and television.
Other times, philosophers just make up their own scenarios.
(C) Either way, the point is to put such concepts to the test. In the
case of time travel, for example, a common thought experiment
is to imagine what would happen if you went back in time and
found yourself in a position to interfere in such a way that you
were never born.
① (A) ― (C) ― (B) 	② (B) ― (A) ― (C)
③ (B) ― (C) ― (A) 	④ (C) ― (A) ― (B)
⑤ (C) ― (B) ― (A)

-- 6 of 8 --

7	영어 영역
7 8
37.
A universal 	indicator 	of 	sleep 	is 	the 	loss 	of 	external
awareness. You are no longer conscious of all that surrounds
you, at least not explicitly. In actual fact, your ears are still
‘hearing’; your eyes, though closed, are still capable of ‘seeing.’
(A) Should they be granted its permission to pass, they are sent
to the cortex at the top of your brain, where they are
consciously 	perceived. 	By 	locking 	its 	gates 	shut, 	the
thalamus imposes a sensory blackout in the brain, preventing
onward travel of those signals to the cortex.
(B) As a result, you are no longer consciously aware of the
information broadcasts being transmitted from your outer
sense organs. At this moment, your brain has lost waking
contact with the outside world. Said another way, you are
now asleep.
(C) All these signals still flood into the center of your brain while
you sleep, but they are blocked by a perceptual barricade set
up in a structure called the thalamus. The thalamus decides
which sensory signals are allowed through its gate, and which
are not. [3점]
* cortex: 대뇌피질 	** thalamus: 시상(視床)
① (A) ― (C) ― (B) 	② (B) ― (A) ― (C)
③ (B) ― (C) ― (A) 	④ (C) ― (A) ― (B)
⑤ (C) ― (B) ― (A)
[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
The norms of objectivity were constructed not because their
creators thought most humans could be ‘empty’ of bias.
Emotional response to the world is an inherent part of ethics.
In ethics, appeals to compassion and empathy can and should be
part of rational arguments about ethical decisions. Moreover, the
best 	practices 	of 	objectivity 	often 	combine 	partiality 	and
impartiality. ( ① ) In a trial, the partiality of the prosecutor and
the defense attorney (and the parties they represent) occurs
within a larger impartial context. ( ② ) A judge or jury puts
partial arguments to the test of objective evidence and to the
impartial rules of law. ( ③ ) Ideally, what is fair and objective
emerges during a trial where partialities make their case and are
judged by objective norms. ( ④ ) The reverse is true: the
norms were constructed because of an acute awareness of
human bias, because it is evident. ( ⑤ ) Rather than conclude
that 	objectivity 	is 	impossible 	because 	bias 	is 	universal,
scientists, journalists, and others concluded the opposite: we
biased humans need the discipline of objectivity to reduce the
ineliminable presence of bias.
* prosecutor: 검사(檢事), 검찰관
39.
Cats ‘pay’ for this nighttime accuracy with less accurate
daytime vision and an inability to focus on close objects.
The fact that cats’ eyes glow in the dark is part of their
enhanced lightgathering efficiency; there is a reflective laye r
behind the retina, so light can hit the retina when it enters the eye,
or when it is reflected from behind the retina. ( ① ) Light that
manages to miss the retina exits the eye and creates that ghostly
glow. ( ② ) When cats’ lightgathering ability is combined with
the very large population of rods in their eyes, the result is a
predator that can see exceptionally well in the dark. ( ③ ) This
may seem counterproductive; what is the point of seeing a mouse
in the dark if, in that final, close moment, the cat can’t focus on it?
( ④ ) Tactile information comes into play at this time; cats can
move their whiskers forward and use them to get information
about objects within the grasp of their jaws. ( ⑤ ) So the next
time you see a cat seeming to nap in the bright sunlight, eyes
halfclosed, remember that it may simply be shielding its retin a
from a surplus of light. [3점]
* rod: (시신경의) 간상체(杆狀體) 	** tactile: 촉각의
*** whisker: (고양이의) 수염
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에
들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
In one study, researchers gave more than five hundred
visitors to an art museum a special glove that reported their
movement patterns along with physiological data such as their
heart rates. The data showed that when people were not
distracted by chatting with companions, they actually had a
stronger emotional response to the art. Of course, there’s
nothing wrong with chatting and letting the art slide past, but
think of the inspiration those museum visitors missed out on.
Then 	apply 	that 	to 	life 	in 	general. 	When 	we 	surround
ourselves with other people, we’re not just missing out on the
finer details of an art exhibition. We’re missing out on the
chance to reflect and understand ourselves better. In fact,
studies show that if we never allow ourselves to be alone, it’s
just plain harder for us to learn. Other research found that
young people who cannot stand being alone were less likely
to develop creative skills like playing an instrument or writing
because the most effective practice of these abilities is often
done while alone.
* physiological: 생리적인
뾞
The study above shows 	(A) 	conversation with
companions 	while 	exploring 	an 	art 	museum 	intensifies
emotional response to art, suggesting that absence of alone
time may 	(B) 	personal growth and learning.
(A) 	(B) 	(A) 	(B)
① avoiding 	…… inhibit 	② recalling 	…… restrain
③ preventing …… enhance 	④ facilitating …… nurture
⑤ dominating …… minimize

-- 7 of 8 --

8 	영어 영역
8 8
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
There are a number of human characteristics that would seem
to be disadvantageous yet continue to survive, generation after
generation. One example is color blindness. Most color blindness
is associated with genes on the X chromosome. Women have
two X chromosomes, so if this problem occurs on one of them,
the other can (a) compensate. But men have only one X
chromosome. If the mutation occurs there, that male is color
blind. We might ask why such a (b) deficiency would survive
and not die out. To understand this, we can consider ancient
huntergatherers, with the men doing most of the hunting for
meat and the women doing most of the gathering of fruits and
nuts. Gathering fruits, especially berries, and nuts is much
more productive if it is easy to distinguish the red or purple
fruit from the green leaves of the plant. If redgreen color
blindness were common among women, the resulting (c) lack
of 	productivity 	would 	likely 	cause 	this 	trait 	to 	die 	out
relatively quickly. On the other hand, the men out hunting don’t
much rely on being able to contrast red from green. Most of the
animals they are hunting have fur or feathers that help them
hide. Rather than relying on color, the hunter relies on an acute
ability to detect motion. It is conceivable that a (d) reduction in
color contrast in these circumstances might actually enhance
one’s ability to detect subtle motions. Given that a hunted
animal blends into its surroundings, less background color
variation would be (e) more of a visual distraction.
* chromosome: 염색체 	** mutation: 돌연변이
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Genetic Code: The Key to Conquering Disorders
② Ancient People’s Challenges from Genetic Weaknesses
③ What Makes a Great Hunter: An Ability to Move Quickly
④ In Evolution, Disadvantageous Doesn’t Mean Destined to Vanish
⑤ Various Biological Factors Causing RedGreen Color Blindness
42. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
[3점]
① (a) 	② (b) 	③ (c) 	④ (d) 	⑤ (e)
[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Pamela and Maggie were identical twins. Even their parents
found it hard to tell them apart. But although they looked
identical, they were different in every other way. They didn’t
have anything in common, so they fought all the time. Pamela
thought that (a) her sister was weird and incomprehensible,
and of course Maggie felt the same way.
(B)
Tired 	of 	the 	endless 	arguments, 	their 	mother 	Rachel
decided to put an end to them. She would make them
understand that each of their points of view could be correct.
One day, the twins were brought to the dining table where a
big board stood in the middle. Pamela sat on one side of the
board and (b) her twin on the other. Rachel asked Pamela
what the color of the board was. “Black,” she said.
(C)
For example, Pamela was always upset at her sister waking
up early in the morning. (c) She didn’t understand why her
sister couldn’t finish what she needed to do at night and sleep
peacefully the next morning. To Maggie, staying up past the
time (d) she began to feel sleepy was exhausting. Besides,
she loved the fresh morning air. They had fights about simple
things like this every day.
(D)
After hearing Pamela’s answer, Rachel asked the same
question to (e) the other daughter. She replied it was white.
Predictably, they began arguing. Rachel then asked them to
switch seats. Each sitting on a new chair, they were surprised
to realize the board was black on one side and white on the
other. Understanding what their mother wanted to say, they
promised they would never insist the other was wrong again.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장
적절한 것은?
① (B) ― (D) ― (C) 	② (C) ― (B) ― (D)
③ (C) ― (D) ― (B) 	④ (D) ― (B) ― (C)
⑤ (D) ― (C) ― (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a) 	② (b) 	③ (c) 	④ (d) 	⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 자매는 외모를 제외한 모든 면에서 서로 달랐다.
② Rachel은 두 딸의 언쟁을 끝내기로 결심했다.
③ Pamela는 판자가 흰색이라고 대답했다.
④ Maggie는 상쾌한 아침 공기를 좋아했다.
⑤ Rachel은 두 딸이 자리를 바꾸도록 요청했다.
※ 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

-- 8 of 8 --

