1 8
1번부터 	17번까지는 	듣고 	답하는 	문제입니다. 	1번부터
15번까지는 	한 	번만 	들려주고, 	16번부터 	17번까지는 	두 	번
들려줍니다. 	방송을 	잘 	듣고 	답을 	하시기 	바랍니다.
1. 	다음을 	듣고, 	여자가 	하는 	말의 	목적으로 	가장 	적절한 	것을 	고
르시오.
① 	교내 	상담실 	이용 	방법을 	안내하려고
② 	의사소통 	능력 	향상을 	위한 	캠프를 	홍보하려고
③ 	방학 	특강에 	대한 	만족도 	조사 	참여를 	독려하려고
④ 	의사소통 	능력 	캠프의 	일정 	변경을 	공지하려고
⑤ 	또래 	상담 	봉사 	활동 	지원자를 	모집하려고
2. 	대화를 	듣고, 	남자의 	의견으로 	가장 	적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
① 	노트북의 	보안 	프로그램을 	최신 	상태로 	유지해야 	한다.
② 	전자 	제품을 	고를 	때 	사용 	후기를 	참고해야 	한다.
③ 	전자 	제품은 	공식 	판매처에서 	구매해야 	한다.
④ 	노트북을 	구매할 	때 	출시 	연도를 	고려해야 	한다.
⑤ 	전자 	제품을 	구매하기 	전에 	보증 	기간을 	확인해야 	한다.
3. 	다음을 	듣고, 	여자가 	하는 	말의 	요지로 	가장 	적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
① 	꾸준히 	운동하려면 	자신이 	즐기는 	운동을 	선택해야 	한다.
② 	전문가에게 	운동을 	배워야 	운동 	능력을 	향상할 	수 	있다.
③ 	준비 	운동을 	충분히 	해야 	부상 	위험을 	줄일 	수 	있다.
④ 	다른 	사람들과 	함께 	운동하면 	동기 	부여에 	도움이 	된다.
⑤ 	운동을 	시작할 	때 	체계적인 	계획을 	세우는 	것이 	중요하다.
4. 	대화를 	듣고, 	그림에서 	대화의 	내용과 	일치하지 	않는 	것을 	고르시오.
②
④
①
③
⑤
5. 	대화를 	듣고, 	남자가 	할 	일로 	가장 	적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
① 	상자에 	라벨 	붙이기 	② 	쓰레기봉투 	사다 	주기
③ 	물건 	분류하기 	④ 	물건 	포장하기
⑤ 	상자 	옮기기
6. 	대화를 	듣고, 	여자가 	지불할 	금액을 	고르시오. 	[3점]
① 	$41 	② 	$43 	③ 	$58 	④ 	$61 	⑤ 	$63
7. 	대화를 	듣고, 	오늘 	농구 	연습이 	진행되지 	않는 	이유를 	고르시오.
① 	체력을 	아끼기 	위해서
② 	팀원이 	부상을 	입어서
③ 	체육관이 	보수 	중이어서
④ 	시합이 	다음 	주로 	연기되어서
⑤ 	체육관에서 	학교 	행사가 	열려서
8. 	대화를 	듣고, 	Grab 	a 	Book 	Challenge에 	관해 	언급되지 	않은
것을 	고르시오.
① 	운영 	주체 	② 	활동 	내용 	③ 	운영 	기간
④ 	참가 	기념품 	⑤ 	참가 	대상
9. 	Global 	Street 	Arts 	Festival에 	관한 	다음 	내용을 	듣고, 	일치하
지 	않는 	것을 	고르시오.
① 	2주 	동안 	주말마다 	열린다.
② 	시청에서 	도서관까지 	이어진다.
③ 	입장료는 	무료이다.
④ 	아이들만을 	위한 	특별 	구역이 	있다.
⑤ 	정오에 	무용수들의 	퍼레이드가 	열린다.
10. 	다음 	표를 	보면서 	대화를 	듣고, 	여자가 	신청할 	강좌를 	고르시오.
Winter 	Sports 	Courses
Course 	Fee 	Level Lesson
Type Day
① 	Curling 	$120 	Advanced 	Group 	Friday
② 	Skating 	$140 	Beginner 	Private 	Sunday
③ 	Ice 	Hockey 	$150 	Beginner 	Group 	Thursday
④ 	Skiing 	$180 	Beginner 	Private 	Tuesday
⑤ 	Snowboarding 	$250 	Advanced 	Private 	Saturday
11. 	대화를 	듣고, 	여자의 	마지막 	말에 	대한 	남자의 	응답으로 	가장
적절한 	것을 	고르시오. 	[3점]
① 	We 	don’t 	take 	reservations 	at 	our 	restaurant.
② 	Let 	me 	check 	and 	see 	if 	we 	have 	a 	table 	available.
③ 	This 	isn’t 	the 	restaurant 	you’ve 	made 	a 	reservation 	at.
④ 	I’m 	afraid 	you’ve 	arrived 	too 	late 	for 	your 	reservation.
⑤ 	It’s 	so 	kind 	of 	you 	to 	save 	seats 	for 	two 	of 	us.
12. 	대화를 	듣고, 	남자의 	마지막 	말에 	대한 	여자의 	응답으로 	가장
적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
① 	Good 	idea. 	Let’s 	take 	those 	toys 	to 	the 	store 	tomorrow.
② 	Oh, 	no! 	The 	toy 	is 	so 	popular 	that 	it’s 	already 	sold 	out.
③ 	Too 	bad. 	I 	wish 	we 	had 	that 	store 	near 	our 	house, 	too.
④ 	Thank 	you. 	Our 	son 	will 	be 	delighted 	with 	his 	new 	toys.
⑤ 	Never 	mind. 	I’ve 	already 	bought 	the 	toys 	from 	the 	store.
2025학년도 	10월 	고3 	전국연합학력평가 	문제지
영어 	영역	제 	3 	교시
1

-- 1 of 8 --

2 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
2 8
13. 	대화를 	듣고, 	남자의 	마지막 	말에 	대한 	여자의 	응답으로 	가장
적절한 	것을 	고르시오. 	[3점]
Woman:
① 	I 	don’t 	care. 	I 	think 	my 	hairstyle 	really 	suits 	me.
② 	You’re 	right. 	It’s 	time 	for 	you 	to 	get 	a 	new 	camera.
③ 	Okay. 	I 	hope 	I 	can 	find 	a 	new 	hairstyle 	with 	the 	app.
④ 	No 	problem. 	I 	can 	help 	you 	download 	the 	camera 	app.
⑤ 	No 	thanks. 	I’ve 	already 	used 	it 	but 	it 	wasn’t 	that 	helpful.
14. 	대화를 	듣고, 	여자의 	마지막 	말에 	대한 	남자의 	응답으로 	가장
적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
Man:
① 	Alright. 	Let’s 	start 	with 	the 	experiment 	plan 	then.
② 	I 	see. 	Let’s 	meet 	after 	lunch 	to 	clean 	the 	school 	lab.
③ 	No 	worries. 	We 	can 	choose 	whichever 	topic 	we 	want.
④ 	Sorry. 	I’m 	not 	interested 	in 	doing 	science 	experiments.
⑤ 	Absolutely! 	The 	experiment 	went 	well 	thanks 	to 	your 	help.
15. 	다음 	상황 	설명을 	듣고, 	Dr. 	Lee가 	Jake에게 	할 	말로 	가장 	적
절한 	것을 	고르시오.
Dr. 	Lee:
① 	You 	should 	take 	your 	dog 	out 	for 	short 	walks 	more 	often.
② 	Why 	don’t 	you 	change 	your 	diet 	to 	care 	for 	your 	health?
③ 	Try 	giving 	your 	dog 	less 	snacks 	to 	manage 	its 	weight.
④ 	I 	recommend 	this 	medicine 	for 	treating 	your 	dog’s 	wound.
⑤ 	Make 	sure 	the 	food 	you 	feed 	it 	is 	something 	dogs 	can 	eat.
[16 	~ 	17] 	다음을 	듣고, 	물음에 	답하시오.
16. 	여자가 	하는 	말의 	주제로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
① 	everyday 	devices 	that 	are 	equipped 	with 	AI
② 	safety 	guidelines 	for 	using 	smart 	electronics
③ 	once 	popular 	devices 	that 	are 	now 	rarely 	used
④ 	overestimated 	value 	of 	innovative 	devices 	with 	AI
⑤ 	different 	home 	devices 	for 	maximum 	electricity 	saving
17. 	언급된 	기기가 	아닌 	것은?
① 	speakers 	② 	TVs 	③ 	washing 	machines
④ 	air 	conditioners 	⑤ 	refrigerators
이제 	듣기 	문제가 	끝났습니다. 	18번부터는 	문제지의 	지시
에 	따라 	답을 	하시기 	바랍니다.
18. 	다음 	글의 	목적으로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
Thank 	you 	for 	applying 	for 	the 	winter 	internship 	program.
I’m 	writing 	this 	email 	to 	provide 	you 	with 	important
information 	regarding 	the 	next 	step 	in 	your 	application
process. 	Based 	on 	the 	materials 	you 	submitted, 	we’ve
recognized 	your 	genuine 	interest 	in 	advancing 	your 	technical
expertise 	and 	software 	development 	skills. 	As 	mentioned
before, 	additional 	documentation 	is 	required 	before 	moving 	to
the 	final 	stage. 	We 	kindly 	ask 	that 	you 	provide 	the 	original
copies 	of 	the 	certificates 	you 	listed 	in 	your 	application.
Please 	send 	the 	documentation 	via 	mail 	by 	November 	7.
Thank 	you.
① 	자격증의 	온라인 	출력 	방법을 	안내하려고
② 	면접 	일정의 	변경을 	공지하려고
③ 	인턴십 	프로그램을 	홍보하려고
④ 	자격증의 	원본 	제출을 	요청하려고
⑤ 	인턴십 	프로그램이 	취소되었음을 	알리려고
19. 	다음 	글에 	드러난 	Mike의 	심경 	변화로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
Mike 	stared 	at 	the 	blinking 	cursor 	on 	the 	screen, 	his 	heart
sinking 	deeper 	with 	each 	passing 	hour. 	He 	had 	rewritten 	the
final 	sentence 	over 	and 	over, 	yet 	nothing 	felt 	right. 	The
pressure 	to 	finish 	was 	mounting 	— 	he 	was 	so 	close, 	but 	the
words 	didn’t 	come 	to 	his 	mind. 	He 	buried 	his 	face 	in 	his
hands 	with 	a 	deep 	sigh. 	Then, 	in 	the 	stillness, 	something
sparked. 	With 	a 	rush, 	he 	typed 	a 	single 	sentence. 	A 	big 	smile
spread 	across 	his 	face. 	“This 	is 	it! 	It’s 	perfect!” 	Mike 	shouted
in 	joy, 	jumping 	up 	from 	his 	chair. 	He 	clapped 	his 	hands 	with
delight. 	It 	felt 	like 	the 	final 	puzzle 	piece 	sliding 	into 	place. 	He
had 	finally 	completed 	what 	he 	had 	long 	dreamed 	of.
① 	joyful 	→ 	regretful 	② 	frustrated 	→ 	happy
③ 	satisfied 	→ 	guilty 	④ 	angry 	→ 	ashamed
⑤ 	anxious 	→ 	calm
20. 	다음 	글에서 	필자가 	주장하는 	바로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
You 	probably 	have 	quirks 	in 	your 	own 	memory 	and
feedback 	loop: 	the 	past 	negative 	experiences 	that 	feel 	bigger
than 	they 	should, 	or 	the 	positive 	affirmations 	that 	we 	can
overinterpret. 	The 	important 	thing 	is 	to 	take 	some 	conscious
control 	over 	a 	process 	that 	otherwise 	proceeds 	unconsciously,
robbing 	us 	of 	complete 	ownership 	of 	how 	we 	think 	about 	life
situations 	and 	make 	decisions. 	If 	you 	are 	struggling 	to
commit 	to 	a 	relationship 	because 	your 	last 	one 	was 	difficult,
you 	need 	to 	remember 	that 	your 	previous 	one 	does 	not
define 	you; 	the 	weighting 	of 	that 	may 	be 	too 	heavy 	in 	your
feedback 	loop, 	inhibiting 	your 	ability 	to 	judge 	the 	new
relationship 	on 	its 	merits. 	We 	need 	to 	think 	about
why 	we
feel 	a 	certain 	way, 	whether 	that 	is 	uncertain 	or
overconfident, 	and 	try 	to 	locate 	the 	root 	of 	that 	emotion 	in
the 	previous 	experiences 	that 	have 	filled 	our 	memory 	banks
and 	conditioned 	our 	feedback 	loops.
* 	quirk: 	별난 	점 	** 	loop: 	순환
① 	때로는 	무의식적 	판단이 	더 	옳다는 	것을 	인정해야 	한다.
② 	주관보다는 	공신력 	있는 	자료를 	바탕으로 	결정해야 	한다.
③ 	우리가 	과거 	경험에서 	받는 	영향을 	의식적으로 	통제해야 	한다.
④ 	낯선 	상황에서 	빠르게 	판단하려면 	다양한 	경험을 	쌓아야 	한다.
⑤ 	중요한 	결정을 	할 	때 	그에 	따른 	장기적인 	결과를 	고려해야 	한다.

-- 2 of 8 --

고 	3 	영어 	영역 	3
3 8
21. 	밑줄 	친 	I 	am 	a 	general, 	my 	soldiers 	are 	the 	keys.가 	다음
글에서 	의미하는 	바로 	가장 	적절한 	것은? 	[3점]
One 	consequence 	of 	the 	hierarchical 	organization 	of 	action
is 	that 	when 	we 	reach 	for 	a 	cup 	of 	coffee, 	we 	do 	not 	need
to 	consciously 	activate 	the 	sequence 	of 	muscles 	to 	send 	our
arm 	and 	hand 	out 	toward 	the 	cup. 	Instead, 	most 	action 	plans
are 	made 	at 	a 	higher 	level 	— 	we 	want 	to 	taste 	the 	coffee,
and 	our 	arm, 	hand, 	and 	mouth 	coordinate 	to 	make 	it 	so. 	This
means 	that 	in 	a 	skilled 	task 	such 	as 	playing 	the 	piano, 	there
is 	a 	delicate 	ballet 	between 	conscious 	plans 	unfolding 	further
up 	the 	hierarchy 	(choosing 	how 	fast 	to 	play, 	or 	how 	much
emphasis 	to 	put 	on 	particular 	passages) 	and 	the 	automatic
and 	unconscious 	aspects 	of 	motor 	control 	that 	send 	our
fingers 	toward 	the 	right 	keys 	at 	just 	the 	right 	time. 	When
watching 	a 	concert 	pianist 	at 	work, 	it 	seems 	as 	though 	their
hands 	and 	fingers 	have 	a 	life 	of 	their 	own, 	while 	the 	pianist
glides 	above 	it 	all, 	issuing 	commands 	from 	on 	high. 	As 	the
celebrated 	pianist 	Vladimir 	Horowitz 	declared, 	“I 	am 	a
general, 	my 	soldiers 	are 	the 	keys.”
* 	glide: 	미끄러지듯 	움직이다
① 	It 	is 	unrealistic 	to 	expect 	precise 	implementation 	of 	every
command 	at 	all 	times.
② 	Musicians 	must 	achieve 	perfect 	finger 	independence 	for
outstanding 	performance.
③ 	When 	motor 	skills 	operate, 	they 	are 	actually 	being
commanded 	by 	higherlevel 	consciousness.
④ 	Artistic 	excellence 	can 	be 	achieved 	only 	when 	preceded
by 	tremendous 	amount 	of 	practice.
⑤ 	A 	physical 	reaction 	occurs 	automatically, 	independent 	of 	a
performer’s 	deliberate 	intention.
22. 	다음 	글의 	요지로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
Our 	yearning 	for 	belonging 	is 	so 	hardwired 	that 	we 	often
try 	to 	acquire 	it 	by 	any 	means 	possible, 	including 	trying 	to
fit 	in 	and 	working 	hard 	for 	approval 	and 	acceptance. 	Not
only 	are 	these 	efforts 	hollow 	substitutes 	for 	belonging, 	but
they 	are 	the 	greatest 	barriers 	to 	belonging. 	When 	we 	work
to 	fit 	in 	and 	be 	accepted, 	our 	“belonging” 	is 	unstable. 	If 	we
do 	or 	say 	something 	that’s 	true 	to 	who 	we 	are 	but 	outside
the 	expectations 	or 	rules 	of 	the 	group, 	we 	risk 	everything.
If 	people 	don’t 	really 	know 	who 	we 	are 	and 	what 	we 	believe
or 	think, 	there’s 	no 	true 	belonging. 	Because 	we 	can 	feel
belonging 	only 	if 	we 	have 	the 	courage 	to 	share 	our 	most
authentic 	selves 	with 	people, 	our 	sense 	of 	belonging 	can
never 	be 	greater 	than 	our 	level 	of 	selfacceptance. 	We 	can
never 	truly 	belong 	if 	we 	are 	betraying 	ourselves, 	our 	ideals,
or 	our 	values 	in 	the 	process. 	That 	is 	why 	it’s 	a 	mistake 	to
think 	that 	belonging 	is 	passive 	and 	simply 	about 	joining 	or
“going 	along” 	with 	others. 	It’s 	not.
* 	yearning: 	갈망 	** 	hollow: 	공허한
① 	자신을 	있는 	그대로 	드러내 	보일 	때 	진정한 	소속감을 	느낄 	수 	있다.
② 	타인의 	기대에서 	벗어날 	때 	비로소 	진정한 	자아를 	실현할 	수 	있다.
③ 	속하려는 	집단과 	자신의 	성향이 	잘 	맞는지 	살펴볼 	필요가 	있다.
④ 	때로는 	개인의 	선호가 	집단의 	목표에 	충분히 	반영되지 	않는다.
⑤ 	타인의 	비판을 	인정할 	수 	있을 	때 	자기 	수용이 	가능해진다.
23. 	다음 	글의 	주제로 	가장 	적절한 	것은? 	[3점]
Places 	today 	have 	become 	exhibitions 	of 	themselves.
Through 	heavy 	investment 	in 	architecture, 	art, 	design,
exhibition 	space, 	landscaping 	and 	various 	kinds 	of
redevelopment 	towns, 	cities 	and 	countryside 	pronounce 	their
possession 	of 	various 	cultural 	values 	— 	such 	as 	unchanging
nature, 	the 	historic 	past, 	the 	dynamic 	future, 	multiculturalism,
fun 	and 	pleasure, 	artistic 	creativity 	or 	simply 	stylishness.
These 	cultural 	values 	have 	come 	to 	be 	seen 	as 	a 	place’s
identity, 	the 	possession 	of 	which 	is 	key 	to 	the 	important 	task
of 	attracting 	visitors. 	And 	this 	identity 	is 	expected 	to 	be
easily 	accessed 	by 	those 	visitors 	or, 	to 	use 	a 	currently
favoured 	term 	in 	urban 	design, 	to 	be
legible. 	Places 	whose
identity 	seems 	inaccessible, 	confusing 	or 	contradictory 	do 	not
present 	themselves 	as 	destinations. 	They 	do 	not, 	in 	other
words, 	seem 	visitable. 	An 	identity 	that 	is 	not 	pointed 	to 	in
the 	form 	of 	wellrestored 	or 	beautifully 	designed 	buildings,
artworks, 	shopping 	plazas, 	streets, 	walkways 	or 	gardens 	does
not 	compose 	itself 	into 	a 	view 	nor 	offer 	itself 	as 	an
‘experience’. 	To 	avoid 	such 	a 	fate, 	places 	should 	‘make 	the
most 	of 	themselves’. 	In 	this 	way, 	they 	can 	find 	their 	niche 	in
the 	new 	cultural 	economy 	of 	visitability.
* 	legible: 	알아볼 	수 	있는 	** 	niche: 	꼭 	맞는 	역할
① 	importance 	of 	places 	showcasing 	a 	clear 	cultural 	identity
② 	need 	for 	preserving 	traditional 	lifestyles 	from 	urbanization
③ 	benefits 	of 	mixing 	foreign 	and 	local 	culture 	to 	attract 	tourists
④ 	impact 	of 	globalization 	in 	weakening 	the 	uniqueness 	of 	location
⑤ 	role 	of 	citizen 	participation 	in 	shaping 	urban 	identity 	and 	design
24. 	다음 	글의 	제목으로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
For 	most 	people, 	the 	word 	“property” 	just 	refers 	to 	“stuff”:
land, 	yes, 	but 	also 	the 	structures 	on 	that 	land, 	as 	well 	as
physical 	possessions 	and 	even 	intangibles 	like 	ideas 	or 	radio
frequencies. 	If 	you 	can 	own 	it, 	or 	claim 	some 	kind 	of 	right
to 	it, 	it’s 	property. 	But 	sociologists 	and 	anthropologists 	have
observed 	that 	in 	human 	societies, 	property 	rights 	systems
aren’t 	really 	about 	“stuff”; 	they’re 	about 	people. 	More
specifically, 	a 	property 	right 	isn’t 	a 	relationship 	between 	a
person 	and 	an 	object, 	it’s 	an 	agreement 	between 	people
about
the 	object. 	And 	these 	agreements 	aren’t 	limited 	to 	written
deeds 	and 	titles, 	or 	other 	property 	laws 	in 	a 	society. 	Becher
explained 	that 	a 	sociologist 	like 	herself 	“would 	see 	property
as 	a 	kind 	of 	social 	agreement. 	Property 	rights 	certainly 	exist
in 	writing, 	in 	law, 	and 	that’s 	part 	of 	what 	they 	are. 	But
they’re 	really 	only 	real 	to 	the 	extent 	that 	we 	respect 	them.
[So, 	property 	rights 	are, 	in 	a 	sense,] 	claims 	that 	people
make 	that 	get 	respected 	by 	others. 	So 	they’re 	always 	social.”
* 	intangible: 	무형 	자산 	** 	deed: 	증서
① 	How 	Can 	We 	Build 	Agreement 	When 	Reforming 	Property 	Law?
② 	Rethinking 	Property: 	Understanding 	It 	as 	a 	Social 	Agreement
③ 	The 	Growing 	Importance 	of 	Protecting 	Private 	Property
④ 	Social 	Duty: 	Reframing 	Possession 	as 	Collective 	Goods
⑤ 	New 	Insight 	on 	Property 	as 	a 	Timeless 	Asset

-- 3 of 8 --

4 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
4 8
25. 	다음 	도표의 	내용과 	일치하지 	않는 	것은?
Share 	of 	Cereals 	Allocated 	to 	Human 	Food,
Animal 	Feed, 	Industrial 	Use, 	and 	Processing, 	2022
The 	above 	graph 	shows 	the 	share 	of 	cereals 	allocated 	to
human 	food, 	animal 	feed, 	industrial 	use, 	and 	processing 	among
four 	countries 	in 	2022. 	① 	Each 	of 	the 	four 	countries 	allocated
more 	than 	40 	percent 	of 	cereals 	to 	animal 	feed, 	which 	was 	also
the 	highest 	share 	among 	all 	cereal 	uses 	within 	each 	country
except 	in 	China. 	② 	Among 	the 	four 	countries, 	China 	had 	the
highest 	share 	of 	cereals 	allocated 	to 	human 	food 	whereas 	the
United 	States 	had 	the 	lowest. 	③ 	Within 	Australia, 	the 	share 	of
cereals 	allocated 	to 	animal 	feed 	showed 	the 	highest 	percentage,
which 	was 	less 	than 	three 	times 	that 	of 	cereals 	allocated 	to
human 	food. 	④ 	In 	terms 	of 	industrial 	use, 	the 	United 	States
had 	the 	highest 	percentage 	of 	cereals 	allocated 	to 	industrial 	use
while 	Australia 	had 	the 	lowest. 	⑤ 	Within 	France, 	more 	cereals
were 	allocated 	to 	processing 	than 	to 	industrial 	use 	and 	this 	was
reversed 	in 	all 	the 	other 	countries.
26. 	Mary 	Eliza 	Mahoney에 	관한 	다음 	글의 	내용과 	일치하지 	않는
것은?
Born 	in 	1845 	in 	Boston, 	Mary 	Eliza 	Mahoney 	was 	known 	as
the 	first 	African 	American 	nurse 	in 	the 	United 	States. 	She
attended 	the 	Phillips 	School 	in 	Boston, 	one 	of 	the 	first
integrated 	schools 	in 	the 	United 	States. 	When 	she 	was 	in 	her
teens, 	Mahoney 	knew 	that 	she 	wanted 	to 	become 	a 	nurse. 	To
work 	towards 	her 	goal, 	Mahoney 	began 	working 	at 	the 	New
England 	Hospital 	for 	Women 	and 	Children, 	which 	operated 	one
of 	the 	first 	nursing 	schools 	in 	the 	United 	States. 	She 	was
admitted 	to 	its 	nursing 	program 	in 	1878 	at 	the 	age 	of 	33.
Upon 	graduation, 	she 	became 	a 	private 	duty 	nurse. 	In 	1908,
Mahoney 	cofounded 	the 	National 	Association 	of 	Colored
Graduate 	Nurses 	(NACGN) 	to 	promote 	equality 	for 	African
American 	nurses. 	Recognizing 	that 	Mahoney 	served 	as 	an
outstanding 	role 	model 	for 	nurses 	of 	all 	races, 	NACGN
created 	the 	Mary 	Mahoney 	Award 	in 	1936.
① 	Boston에 	있는 	Phillips 	School을 	다녔다.
② 	십 	대 	시절에 	간호사가 	되기를 	원했다.
③ 	33살에 	간호 	프로그램에 	합격했다.
④ 	1908년에 	NACGN을 	혼자서 	설립했다.
⑤ 	1936년에 	NACGN은 	Mary 	Mahoney 	상을 	만들었다.
27. 	Playtime 	with 	Books에 	관한 	다음 	안내문의 	내용과 	일치하지
않는 	것은?
Playtime 	with 	Books
Read, 	write, 	and 	play 	— 	your 	Saturday 	becomes 	a
storyfilled 	adventure.
∙ 	Date: 	December 	6
∙ 	Target: 	Elementary 	school 	students 	(Grades 	3 	& 	4)
∙ 	Location: 	Bluebell 	Library 	Multipurpose 	Room
∙ 	Registration
- 	Registration 	starts 	on 	November 	17.
- 	Visit 	our 	homepage 	and 	click 	the 	event 	banner.
* 	Note: 	First 	come, 	first 	served! 	Registration 	will 	close
once 	all 	spots 	are 	filled.
∙ 	Programs
- 	Morning 	Program: 	Create 	Your 	Own 	Amazing 	Tales
- 	Afternoon 	Program: 	Design 	Your 	Book 	Cover
① 	날짜는 	12월 	6일이다.
② 	대상은 	초등학교 	3학년과 	4학년이다.
③ 	등록은 	11월 	17일에 	시작한다.
④ 	등록은 	선착순이다.
⑤ 	오전 	프로그램은 	책 	표지 	디자인하기이다.
28. 	Bluetooth 	VR 	Goggles에 	관한 	다음 	안내문의 	내용과 	일치하
는 	것은?
Bluetooth 	VR 	Goggles
- 	Instruction 	Manual 	-
How 	to 	Operate 	the 	Bluetooth 	VR 	Goggles
∙ 	Turn 	on 	Bluetooth 	in 	your 	smartphone 	settings, 	and
search 	for 	the 	“VR 	Goggles” 	Bluetooth 	signal.
∙ 	Start 	the 	app 	or 	content 	you 	want 	to 	use 	on 	your
smartphone, 	before 	putting 	on 	the 	goggles.
∙ 	If 	the 	goggles 	remain 	inactive 	for 	30 	minutes, 	they
will 	automatically 	shut 	down.
Charging 	Instructions
∙ 	The 	red 	light 	means 	the 	device 	needs 	to 	be 	charged.
∙ 	The 	green 	light 	means 	the 	battery 	is 	fully 	charged.
∙ 	The 	power 	connector 	is 	on 	the 	left 	strap.
Caution 	When 	Charging
∙ 	Do 	not 	charge 	while 	wearing 	the 	goggles.
∙ 	When 	charging, 	put 	the 	goggles 	in 	a 	cool 	and 	dry 	area.
① 	고글을 	착용한 	후에 	스마트폰 	앱을 	실행해야 	한다.
② 	10분 	동안 	사용하지 	않으면 	자동으로 	전원이 	꺼진다.
③ 	녹색 	불은 	충전해야 	한다는 	의미이다.
④ 	전원 	연결 	장치는 	오른쪽 	끈에 	있다.
⑤ 	고글을 	착용한 	채로 	충전하면 	안 	된다.

-- 4 of 8 --

고 	3 	영어 	영역 	5
5 8
29. 	다음 	글의 	밑줄 	친 	부분 	중, 	어법상 	틀린 	것은? 	[3점]
The 	physical 	act 	of 	movement 	in 	the 	morning 	is 	not 	just
beneficial 	for 	the 	body 	— 	it 	serves 	as 	a 	powerful 	stimulant 	for
the 	brain, 	① 	awakening 	it 	from 	the 	stillness 	of 	sleep 	and
preparing 	it 	for 	the 	demands 	of 	the 	day. 	This 	awakening 	goes
beyond 	physical 	health; 	it 	plays 	a 	critical 	role 	in 	enhancing
cognitive 	function, 	particularly 	in 	the 	realms 	of 	creativity 	and
imagination. 	One 	of 	the 	key 	mechanisms 	② 	which 	this 	occurs
is 	increased 	blood 	flow 	to 	the 	hippocampus, 	a 	part 	of 	the
brain 	responsible 	for 	memory, 	learning, 	and 	the 	creation 	of
new 	ideas. 	The 	hippocampus, 	often 	described 	as 	the 	brain’s
center 	for 	imagination 	and 	memory 	consolidation, 	thrives 	on
the 	increased 	oxygenation 	and 	nutrients 	③ 	provided 	by
physical 	movement. 	Studies 	published 	in 	journals 	highlight
the 	positive 	effects 	of 	regular 	morning 	exercise 	on 	cognitive
flexibility 	and 	creative 	thinking, 	confirming 	that 	exercise 	not
only 	promotes 	physical 	health 	but 	also 	stimulates 	neural
plasticity 	— 	the 	brain’s 	ability 	to 	reorganize 	④ 	itself 	by
forming 	new 	neural 	connections. 	This 	adaptability 	is 	essential
for 	creative 	thought, 	as 	it 	allows 	individuals 	⑤ 	to 	approach
problems 	from 	new 	angles, 	make 	novel 	associations, 	and
think 	more 	differently.
* 	hippocampus: 	해마 	** 	consolidation: 	강화 	*** 	plasticity: 	가소성
30. 	다음 	글의 	밑줄 	친 	부분 	중, 	문맥상 	낱말의 	쓰임이 	적절하지
않은 	것은?
Information 	is 	an 	important 	ingredient 	for 	good
decisionmaking. 	And 	so, 	a 	variety 	of 	guardrails 	① 	exist 	that
shape 	what 	information 	is 	available. 	For 	instance, 	in 	the
United 	States, 	corporate 	disclosure 	laws 	② 	limit 	what 	a
company’s 	executives 	can 	share 	publicly 	and 	when. 	Share 	too
much 	information 	and 	you 	risk 	being 	fined. 	In 	other 	contexts,
the 	reverse 	is 	true, 	and 	one 	is 	③ 	forbidden 	to 	make 	public
certain 	information. 	Pharmaceutical 	companies 	need 	to 	disclose
possible 	side 	effects 	for 	the 	drugs 	they 	manufacture 	and 	the
food 	industry 	needs 	to 	put 	nutritional 	labels 	on 	most 	of 	their
products. 	Sometimes, 	such 	a
l’obligation 	d’information, 	as 	the
French 	call 	it 	poetically, 	may 	apply 	to 	a 	company’s 	clients.
Insurance 	policies 	are 	an 	example. 	The 	insured 	is 	typically
under 	a 	duty 	to 	④ 	disclose 	material 	facts 	that 	affect 	the 	risk
to 	the 	insurer. 	In 	a 	similar 	way, 	the 	state 	itself 	makes
available 	a 	wide 	variety 	of 	information 	to 	help 	individuals
make 	better 	decisions. 	Laws 	are 	made 	⑤ 	public 	so 	that
citizens 	can 	obey 	them, 	at 	least 	in 	democratic 	states. 	Public
registers, 	such 	as 	for 	corporations 	or 	landownership, 	help
people 	decide 	whether 	to 	engage 	in 	a 	business 	transaction.
* 	pharmaceutical: 	제약의
[31 	~ 	34] 	다음 	빈칸에 	들어갈 	말로 	가장 	적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
31. 	As 	a 	general 	rule, 	when 	the 	individuals 	of 	a 	population
encounter 	a 	new 	environmental 	stress, 	some 	individuals 	in
the 	population 	will 	die 	prematurely 	and 	some 	individuals 	will
survive. 	If 	the 	reason 	for 	their 	survival 	(such 	as 	a 	slightly
enhanced 	ability 	or 	trait) 	can 	be 	passed 	on 	to 	their 	offspring
(that 	is, 	it’s 	genetically 	encoded), 	then 	the 	next 	generation
should 	be 	better 	able 	to 	withstand 	the 	newly 	encountered
environmental 	stress, 	and 	the 	population 	overall 	will 	be 	less
susceptible 	to 	it. 	Therefore, 	the 	key 	to 	the 	ability 	of 	a
population 	to 	survive 	by 	adaptation 	lies 	in 	the
with 	which 	the 	next 	generation, 	the 	more
resistant 	generation, 	is 	produced 	by 	the 	survivors 	of 	this
generation. 	It 	follows 	that 	those 	species 	capable 	of 	producing
a 	new 	generation 	very 	quickly 	should 	be 	better 	able 	to
respond 	to 	a 	stress 	very 	quickly. 	Those 	species 	that 	require
more 	time 	for 	reproduction 	will 	be 	slower 	to 	adapt 	to 	the
stress 	because 	of 	the 	additional 	time 	needed 	for 	them 	to
produce 	stresstolerant 	offspring.
* 	susceptible: 	영향을 	받기 	쉬운
① 	rapidity
② 	precision
③ 	simplicity
④ 	consistency
⑤ 	randomness
32. 	The 	digital 	age 	has 	brought 	remarkable 	advancements 	in
communication. 	A 	message 	that 	might 	have 	taken 	weeks 	to
deliver 	by 	mail 	can 	now 	be 	sent 	in 	seconds. 	Yet, 	in 	this
shift 	toward 	efficiency, 	we’ve 	lost 	something 	essential: 	the
richness 	of 	facetoface 	interaction. 	Think 	about 	it 	— 	when
you 	communicate 	through 	a 	text 	or 	email, 	you’re 	missing 	out
on 	nonverbal 	cues 	like 	facial 	expressions, 	tone 	of 	voice, 	and
body 	language. 	These 	elements 	carry 	emotional 	weight,
helping 	us 	to 	interpret 	meaning 	and 	intent. 	Without 	them,
our 	understanding 	of 	others’ 	emotions 	is 	often 	incomplete,
leading 	to 	confusion 	and 	frustration. 	Take, 	for 	instance, 	a
short 	reply 	to 	an 	email: 	“Okay.” 	Depending 	on 	the 	context,
the 	sender’s 	intention 	might 	be 	neutral, 	annoyed, 	or 	even
sarcastic. 	But 	without 	vocal 	inflections 	or 	facial 	expressions
to 	guide 	us, 	we 	are 	left 	guessing. 	This 	is 	why 	digital
communication 	requires 	heightened 	emotional 	awareness 	— 	not
only 	to 	express 	ourselves 	effectively 	but 	also 	to 	decode
.
* 	inflection: 	억양
① 	the 	source 	materials 	we 	refer 	to
② 	the 	specific 	subject 	being 	personified
③ 	the 	grammatical 	structures 	in 	a 	speech
④ 	the 	emotions 	behind 	the 	words 	we 	receive
⑤ 	the 	newlycoined 	words 	used 	in 	the 	digital 	era

-- 5 of 8 --

6 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
6 8
33. 	Our 	epistemic 	relation 	to 	selfdetermination 	is 	open 	to
error 	and, 	thus, 	subjective. 	Turning 	oneself 	into 	an 	agent 	of
a 	particular 	kind 	by 	conceiving 	of 	oneself 	as 	that 	type 	of
agent 	does 	not 	suffice 	to 	make 	it 	the 	case 	that
. 	Just 	imagine 	someone
who 	believes 	himself 	to 	be 	a 	natural 	born 	tango 	dancer. 	He
has 	watched 	many 	videos 	about 	tango 	dancing 	and 	practices
dancing 	by 	himself 	for 	many 	years. 	Having 	prepared 	himself
for 	a 	glorious 	entrance 	on 	the 	international 	scene, 	he 	travels
to 	Buenos 	Aires 	and 	shows 	up 	at 	Maldita 	Milonga 	to 	show
his 	skills. 	Unbeknownst 	to 	him, 	though, 	his 	dancing 	(if
dancing 	it 	be) 	does 	not 	even 	remotely 	resemble 	tango, 	and
nothing 	he 	does 	on 	stage 	can 	be 	recognized 	as 	tango
dancing. 	Hence, 	while 	he 	conceived 	of 	himself 	as 	a 	tango
dancer 	and 	did 	many 	things 	in 	light 	of 	that 	selfconception
(including 	buying 	a 	ticket 	to 	Buenos 	Aires, 	dressing 	up,
consuming 	hours 	of 	tango 	videos, 	reading 	books 	about 	tango,
learning 	Spanish, 	etc.), 	he 	failed 	at 	meeting 	some 	of 	the
minimal 	norms 	of 	actually 	being 	a 	tango 	dancer 	at 	all. 	[3점]
* 	epistemic: 	인식론의 	** 	suffice: 	충분하다
① 	one 	downplays 	others’ 	feedback
② 	one 	actually 	is 	that 	type 	of 	agent
③ 	one’s 	innate 	ability 	precedes 	mastery
④ 	one 	is 	capable 	of 	setting 	priorities
⑤ 	one 	fails 	to 	stick 	to 	one’s 	goal
34. 	What 	makes 	social 	attention 	distinct, 	and 	more 	farreaching
than 	many 	other 	forms 	of 	social 	connection, 	is 	that 	it 	can
. 	You 	can’t
have 	a	
relationship 	with 	a 	celebrity 	unless 	you 	know 	him
and 	he 	knows 	you. 	But 	a 	celebrity
can 	be 	the 	object 	of 	your
social 	attention. 	And 	this 	kind 	of 	onesided 	social 	attention
isn’t 	something 	trivial 	or 	secondary, 	but 	an 	enormous 	part 	of
our 	lives. 	In 	tenth 	grade, 	you 	can 	spend 	most 	of 	your
waking 	hours 	daydreaming 	about 	a 	high 	school 	senior 	you
have 	a 	crush 	on. 	As 	an 	adult, 	you 	might 	find 	yourself 	having
imaginary 	arguments 	in 	your 	head 	with 	a 	certain 	media
personality. 	Think 	for 	a 	moment 	of 	the 	pantheon 	of
strangers 	we 	have 	in 	our 	heads 	that 	we 	put 	our 	social
attention 	on 	— 	from 	athletes 	we 	root 	for 	or 	jeer, 	to
celebrities, 	to 	people 	whose 	struggle 	we 	encounter 	in 	the
news. 	An 	enormous 	part 	of 	our 	social 	attention 	falls 	upon
people 	who 	do 	not 	know 	us 	at 	all. 	[3점]
* 	pantheon: 	만신전(萬神殿) 	** 	jeer: 	야유하다
① 	focus 	exclusively 	on 	figures 	we 	admire
② 	depend 	on 	someone’s 	inperson 	presence
③ 	deepen 	our 	mutual 	relationship 	over 	time
④ 	fade 	away 	without 	constant 	reinforcement
⑤ 	live 	outside 	of 	the 	actual 	relationships 	we 	have
35. 	다음 	글에서 	전체 	흐름과 	관계 	없는 	문장은?
We 	often 	use 	the 	word
ignorance 	to 	denote 	a 	primitive 	or
foolish 	set 	of 	beliefs. 	In 	fact, 	I 	would 	say 	that 	“explanation”
is 	often 	primitive 	or 	foolish, 	and 	the 	recognition 	of 	ignorance
is 	the 	beginning 	of 	scientific 	discourse. 	① 	When 	we 	admit
that 	something 	is 	unknown 	and 	inexplicable, 	then 	we 	admit
also 	that 	it 	is 	worthy 	of 	investigation. 	② 	David 	Helfand, 	the
astronomer, 	traces 	how 	our 	view 	of 	the 	wind 	evolved 	from
the 	primitive 	to 	the 	scientific: 	first 	“the 	wind 	is 	angry,”
followed 	by 	“the 	wind 	god 	is 	angry,” 	and 	finally 	“the 	wind 	is
a 	measurable 	form 	of 	energy.” 	③ 	The 	first 	two 	statements
provide 	a 	complete 	explanation 	but 	are 	clearly 	ignorant; 	the
third 	shows 	our 	ignorance 	(we 	can’t 	predict 	or 	alter 	the
weather 	yet) 	but 	is 	surely 	less 	ignorant. 	④ 	It 	is 	undeniable
that 	ignorance 	stands 	as 	the 	greatest 	barrier 	to 	scientific
discovery 	and 	thus 	it 	fails 	to 	function 	as 	a 	support 	to
scientists. 	⑤ 	Explanation 	rather 	than 	ignorance 	is 	the
hallmark 	of 	intellectual 	narrowness.
[36 	~ 	37] 	주어진 	글 	다음에 	이어질 	글의 	순서로 	가장 	적절한 	것
을 	고르시오.
36.
Some 	propositions 	about 	lotteries 	are 	extremely 	likely
to 	be 	true. 	Consider 	the 	proposition 	‘any 	given 	ticket 	in 	a
tenmillion 	ticket 	lottery 	is 	a 	losing 	ticket’.
(A) 	If 	we 	want 	to 	avoid 	conceding 	that 	the 	scope 	of 	our
knowledge 	is 	much 	more 	limited 	than 	usually 	supposed,
there 	must 	be 	some 	difference 	between 	the 	probabilistic
evidence 	we 	have 	about 	the 	lottery 	and 	evidence 	for
regular 	things 	that 	we 	do 	know.
(B) 	Despite 	being 	overwhelmingly 	likely 	to 	be 	true, 	many
philosophers 	think 	that 	such 	propositions, 	based 	on
probabilities 	alone, 	are 	different 	from 	other 	propositions
we 	regularly 	rely 	upon. 	It’s 	been 	popular 	to 	suppose, 	for
instance, 	that 	we 	don’t	
know 	that 	we 	have 	lost 	the
lottery 	just 	by 	reflecting 	on 	how 	unlikely 	winning 	is.
(C) 	This 	is 	puzzling, 	because 	there 	are
many 	things 	we 	take
ourselves 	to 	know 	even 	though 	we 	presumably 	have
more 	than 	a 	oneintenmillion 	chance 	of 	being 	wrong.
For 	example, 	you 	might 	know 	you 	will 	attend 	a 	meeting
later, 	even 	though 	occasionally 	meetings 	get 	cancelled
unexpectedly 	— 	and 	surely 	more 	frequently 	than
oneintenmillion 	meetings! 	[3점]
* 	proposition: 	명제 	** 	concede: 	인정하다
① 	(A) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	② 	(B) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(C)
③ 	(B) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	④ 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(B)
⑤ 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(A)

-- 6 of 8 --

고 	3 	영어 	영역 	7
7 8
37.
In 	everyday 	life, 	most 	people 	think 	that 	media 	effects
are 	things 	that 	show 	up 	during 	a 	media 	exposure 	or
immediately 	afterward.
(A) 	This 	is 	an 	example 	of 	a 	media 	message 	triggering 	an
immediate 	effect 	— 	a 	buying 	behavior 	— 	on 	you. 	But 	let’s
say 	you 	did 	not 	click 	on 	the 	buy 	now 	button 	to 	buy 	the
product; 	does 	this 	mean 	there 	was 	no 	media 	effect?
Perhaps, 	but 	also 	perhaps 	not.
(B) 	Of 	course 	some 	effects 	do 	show 	up 	immediately, 	but
other 	effects 	may 	take 	a 	long 	time 	to 	manifest
themselves. 	Let’s 	say 	you 	see 	an 	ad 	for 	a 	product 	on 	a
website 	and 	you 	click 	on 	a 	buy 	now 	button 	to 	buy 	that
product.
(C) 	If 	you 	continually 	expose 	yourself 	to 	ads 	in 	the 	media,
you 	may 	gradually 	over 	time 	come 	to 	believe 	that 	you
have 	more 	needs 	than 	you 	really 	have 	and 	that 	all 	of
those 	needs 	can 	be 	easily 	satisfied 	by 	buying 	particular
products. 	This 	is 	a 	longterm 	effect 	on 	what 	you
believe; 	it 	cannot 	be 	attributed 	to 	any 	one 	media
exposure 	but 	instead 	gradually 	builds 	up 	in 	a 	steady
dripdripdrip 	manner 	over 	time.
① 	(A) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	② 	(B) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(C)
③ 	(B) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	④ 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(B)
⑤ 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(A)
[38 	~ 	39] 	글의 	흐름으로 	보아, 	주어진 	문장이 	들어가기에 	가장
적절한 	곳을 	고르시오.
38.
But 	with 	the 	emerging 	mass 	automobility 	in 	the 	first
decades 	of 	the 	twentieth 	century, 	the 	negative 	effects 	of
human 	agency 	behind 	the 	steering 	wheel 	— 	accidents 	for
example 	— 	became 	a 	serious 	topic 	of 	concern.
Since 	its 	invention 	at 	the 	end 	of 	the 	nineteenth 	century, 	the
automobile 	remained 	a 	machine 	that 	had 	to 	be 	controlled 	by 	a
human 	driver. 	( 	① 	) 	Without 	human 	control 	of 	steering 	wheel,
gas 	pedal 	and 	brakes 	none 	of 	the 	billions 	of 	miles 	could 	have
been 	traversed 	by 	the 	billions 	of 	cars 	in 	the 	world: 	A 	car
always 	needed 	the 	driving 	skills 	of 	a 	human 	to 	fulfill 	its
function. 	( 	② 	) 	Without 	a 	driver, 	it 	would 	have 	been 	only 	an
immobile 	artifact, 	left 	to 	stand 	still 	in 	its 	parking 	lot. 	( 	③ 	) 	In
the 	early 	years 	of 	motoring, 	this 	necessity 	of 	a 	human 	driver
was 	not 	seen 	as 	a 	barrier. 	( 	④ 	) 	Manual 	driving 	promised 	to
fulfill 	the 	human 	dream 	of 	individual 	mobility 	and 	freedom, 	of
selfguidance, 	of 	autonomy. 	( 	⑤ 	) 	It 	is 	no 	surprise 	that 	the
fantasy 	of 	a 	selfdriving 	car, 	a 	car 	that 	can 	navigate 	without 	a
human 	driver, 	can 	be 	dated 	to 	this 	period. 	[3점]
* 	steering 	wheel: 	(자동차의) 	운전대 	** 	traverse: 	횡단하다
*** 	artifact: 	인공물
39.
If 	we 	had 	to 	constantly 	think 	carefully 	about 	every 	one
of 	those 	stimuli 	(or 	even 	a 	small 	subset 	thereof), 	in
order 	to 	understand 	its 	nature 	and 	function, 	we 	would
never 	get 	anything 	done!
That 	the 	brain 	had 	limitations 	on 	the 	amount 	of 	information
processing 	it 	could 	handle 	was 	not 	news 	to 	psychologists.
Indeed, 	about 	15 	years 	earlier, 	Miller 	showed 	this 	with 	his
famous 	paper 	on 	the 	limited 	capacity 	of 	shortterm 	memory.
( 	① 	) 	What	
was 	novel 	was 	the 	connection 	between
categorization 	and 	stereotyping, 	and 	that 	categorization 	was 	an
inevitable 	aspect 	of 	human 	cognition. 	( 	② 	) 	At 	any 	given
second, 	there 	are 	hundreds, 	even 	thousands, 	of 	different
stimuli 	that 	can 	be 	perceived 	in 	our 	immediate 	environment.
( 	③ 	) 	Instead, 	we 	learn 	about 	different 	stimuli, 	and 	tend 	to
group 	them 	in 	terms 	of 	common 	features, 	attributes, 	or
functions. 	( 	④ 	) 	This 	categorization 	process 	then 	becomes 	so
well 	practiced 	as 	to 	become 	automatic, 	and 	it 	frees 	up 	our
consciousness 	to 	attend 	to 	things 	that 	are 	novel 	in 	our
environment, 	or 	to 	our 	current 	task. 	( 	⑤) 	Thus, 	categorization
helps 	us 	reduce 	the 	complexity 	of 	the 	stimuli 	in 	our 	social
environment.
40. 	다음 	글의 	내용을 	한 	문장으로 	요약하고자 	한다. 	빈칸 	(A),
(B)에 	들어갈 	말로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
Cinema 	and 	law 	share 	the 	same 	subjects 	and 	audience.
Rather 	than 	an 	abstract 	desire 	for 	truth 	as 	a 	value 	in
itself, 	the 	law 	deals 	with 	the 	messiness 	of 	human
relations. 	Both 	disciplines 	struggle 	with 	what 	it 	means 	to
be 	human 	and 	try 	to 	communicate 	to 	us 	something 	about
our 	existence; 	both 	are 	human 	artifacts 	directed 	at 	man.
Indeed, 	foundational 	to 	law 	is 	its 	anxiety 	about 	human
nature: 	man 	desires 	freedom 	but 	is 	simultaneously 	too
violent 	to 	exist 	in 	a 	state 	of 	nature 	without 	a 	regime 	of
commands 	and 	prohibitions. 	However, 	there 	is 	also 	an
important 	difference 	here 	that 	makes 	a 	study 	of 	the
interaction 	between 	cinema 	and 	law 	interesting: 	while
cinema 	expresses 	man’s 	affective 	life, 	the 	law 	keeps 	it 	in
check. 	It 	tries 	to 	ensure 	that 	we 	are 	not 	overwhelmed
and 	destroyed 	by 	our 	desires 	and 	drives. 	The 	law
obsessively 	tries 	to 	suppress 	affects, 	fearing 	the 	horror
of 	their 	consequences, 	whereas 	cinema 	introduces 	us 	to
our 	affects, 	often 	forcing 	us 	to 	identify 	the 	most
unbearable 	ones 	in 	ourselves.
* 	regime: 	체제 	** 	suppress: 	억제하다

Cinema 	and 	law 	are 	both 	human 	creations 	that 	explore
(A) 	, 	yet 	they 	differ 	in 	how 	they 	handle 	emotion 	—
cinema 	has 	us 	confront 	it, 	and 	law 	(B) 	limits 	on 	it.
(A) 	(B)
① 	symbols 	······· 	places
② 	symbols 	······· 	reinforces
③ 	nature 	······· 	removes
④ 	humanity 	······· 	imposes
⑤ 	humanity 	······· 	undermines

-- 7 of 8 --

8 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
8 8
[41 	~ 	42] 	다음 	글을 	읽고, 	물음에 	답하시오.
Few 	pick 	up 	a 	novel 	and 	criticize 	it 	because 	the
situations 	it 	describes 	and 	the 	people 	it 	contains 	never
existed 	in 	real 	life. 	Perhaps 	even 	when 	we	
should
criticize 	fiction 	for 	giving 	us 	inaccurate 	or 	biased 	views
of 	the 	state 	of 	the 	world, 	it 	generally 	(a) 	escapes 	our
scorn. 	It’s 	only 	fiction, 	we 	say. 	But 	of 	course 	fiction 	is
more 	than 	just 	something 	made 	up. 	If 	it 	were 	only
that, 	we 	would 	not 	bother 	engaging 	with 	it, 	and 	it
would 	not 	(b) 	occupy 	such 	a 	large 	part 	of 	our 	lives.
Humans 	are 	drawn 	to 	fiction, 	to 	invented 	stories, 	in 	a
way 	unique 	among 	animals. 	If 	we 	think 	about 	this, 	it
may 	seem 	(c) 	odd 	— 	why 	should 	we 	be 	interested 	in
reading 	or 	watching 	on 	screen 	a 	story 	that 	never
happened, 	and 	in 	many 	cases 	that	
could 	never 	happen,
the 	travails 	of 	people 	who 	never 	existed 	and 	could 	never
exist? 	Why 	do 	we 	enjoy 	this? 	What 	do 	we 	get 	out 	of 	it?
We’re 	not 	learning 	anything 	about 	the 	world, 	we’re 	not
gaining 	any 	kind 	of 	(d) 	useful 	experience 	that 	will 	help
us 	navigate 	our 	lives 	more 	effectively, 	we’re 	not
learning 	any 	new 	skill 	or 	developing 	any 	new 	material.
Most 	of 	us 	of 	course 	will 	argue 	that 	there 	is 	a 	great
deal 	of 	value 	in 	engaging 	with 	fiction 	and 	other 	kinds 	of
art, 	even 	though 	these 	things 	may 	teach 	us 	nothing
about 	the 	world 	or 	generate 	artindependent 	skills. 	After
all, 	we 	spend 	(e) 	insignificant 	amounts 	of 	our 	time
engaging 	with 	such 	fiction. 	It 	is 	no 	surprise 	that 	films,
television 	and 	sports, 	video 	games, 	novels, 	and 	the 	like,
are 	billiondollar 	industries.
* 	scorn: 	비웃음 	** 	travail: 	고생
41. 	윗글의 	제목으로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
① 	Drawn 	to 	the 	Unreal: 	Our 	Fascination 	with 	Fiction
② 	What 	True 	Stories 	Can 	Teach 	Us 	About 	Life
③ 	The 	Science 	Behind 	Reading 	and 	Its 	Effects
④ 	Can 	Reading 	Fiction 	Help 	Shape 	Our 	Identity?
⑤ 	Fiction 	as 	a 	Tool 	for 	Improving 	Critical 	Thinking
42. 	밑줄 	친 	(a)~(e) 	중에서 	문맥상 	낱말의 	쓰임이 	적절하지 	않은
것은?
① 	(a) 	② 	(b) 	③ 	(c) 	④ 	(d) 	⑤ 	(e)
[43 	~ 	45] 	다음 	글을 	읽고, 	물음에 	답하시오.
(A)
On 	a 	bright 	fall 	day, 	a 	young 	boy 	named 	Jay 	visited
the 	pumpkin 	festival 	with 	his 	grandfather. 	There, 	he
became 	fascinated 	by 	the 	giant, 	prizewinning 	pumpkins
on 	display. 	Jay 	made 	up 	his 	mind 	to 	grow 	an 	enormous
pumpkin 	himself. 	With 	stars 	sparkling 	in 	his 	eyes, 	(a) 	he
eagerly 	shared 	his 	dream 	with 	his 	grandfather 	that 	he
wanted 	to 	grow 	the 	next 	showwinning 	pumpkin.
(B)
When 	Jay 	found 	out 	what 	the 	squirrel 	had 	done, 	he
searched 	through 	the 	soil 	but 	found 	nothing. 	His 	dream
was 	crushed! 	Still, 	his 	grandfather 	encouraged 	him 	to
plant 	some 	pie 	pumpkin 	seeds 	he 	had 	on 	hand. 	Jay 	agreed
and 	planted 	them. 	After 	some 	time, 	small 	pumpkins 	filled
the 	garden. 	The 	family 	baked 	delicious 	pies 	using 	the
pumpkins 	Jay 	had 	harvested. 	Despite 	the 	setback, 	Jay
found 	joy 	in 	the 	harvest 	and 	the 	time 	spent 	with 	his
family. 	Jay 	promised 	himself 	that 	next 	year, 	(b) 	he 	would
try 	again 	to 	grow 	the 	biggest 	pumpkin 	of 	all.
* 	squirrel: 	다람쥐
(C)
Though 	his 	grandfather 	reminded 	him 	that 	a 	little 	luck
was 	also 	needed, 	Jay 	remained 	confident. 	He 	carefully
kept 	the 	seeds 	he 	had 	bought 	and 	spent 	the 	winter
thinking 	about 	how 	he 	would 	grow 	his 	pumpkins. 	When
spring 	finally 	arrived, 	(c) 	he 	received 	help 	from 	his
grandfather. 	He 	used 	his 	tractor 	to 	prepare 	the 	garden
with 	Jay. 	Jay 	eagerly 	planted 	the 	seeds 	and 	waited 	with
anticipation 	for 	them 	to 	grow. 	But 	then, 	disaster 	struck.
A 	squirrel 	dug 	up 	and 	ate 	every 	single 	seed.
(D)
Seeing 	Jay’s 	excitement, 	(d) 	he 	promised 	to 	help 	him
grow 	a 	giant 	pumpkin. 	When 	they 	visited 	a 	pumpkin 	farm
to 	buy 	seeds, 	he 	explained 	the 	basics 	to 	Jay: 	choose 	a
large 	variety 	and 	plant 	seeds 	from 	the 	biggest 	pumpkins.
He 	also 	advised 	planting 	them 	in 	late 	May, 	when 	the 	soil
is 	warm, 	by 	forming 	small 	hills 	about 	eight 	inches 	high
and 	placing 	six 	to 	eight 	seeds 	in 	each. 	Following 	his
grandfather’s 	advice, 	(e) 	he 	picked 	out 	a 	few 	promising
pumpkin 	seeds.
43. 	주어진 	글 	(A)에 	이어질 	내용을 	순서에 	맞게 	배열한 	것으로
가장 	적절한 	것은?
① 	(B) 	- 	(D) 	- 	(C) 	② 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(D)
③ 	(C) 	- 	(D) 	- 	(B) 	④ 	(D) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(C)
⑤ 	(D) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(B)
44. 	밑줄 	친 	(a)~(e) 	중에서 	가리키는 	대상이 	나머지 	넷과 	다른
것은?
① 	(a) 	② 	(b) 	③ 	(c) 	④ 	(d) 	⑤ 	(e)
45. 	윗글에 	관한 	내용으로 	적절하지 	않은 	것은?
① 	Jay는 	거대한 	호박을 	직접 	기르기로 	결심했다.
② 	가족은 	Jay가 	수확한 	호박으로 	파이를 	구웠다.
③ 	Jay는 	호박을 	어떻게 	기를지 	생각하며 	겨울을 	보냈다.
④ 	다람쥐가 	모든 	씨앗을 	파내어 	먹었다.
⑤ 	할아버지는 	5월 	초에 	씨앗을 	심으라고 	조언했다.
* 	확인 	사항
◦ 	답안지의 	해당란에 	필요한 	내용을 	정확히 	기입(표기)
했는지 	확인하시오.

-- 8 of 8 --

