이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
1 8
1번부터 	17번까지는 	듣고 	답하는 	문제입니다. 	1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 	다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 대회 공연 관람 에티켓을 안내하려고
② 대회 공연 스케줄 확인을 당부하려고
③ 공연 음악 파일 제출을 요청하려고
④ 댄스 연습 스케줄 변경을 알리려고
⑤ 댄스 대회 참여 신청을 독려하려고
2. 	대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 공간에 대한 취향은 개인마다 차이가 있다.
② 불필요한 감정 소모는 스트레스를 일으킨다.
③ 방을 정리하는 것은 기분 전환에 도움이 된다.
④ 작업 환경을 자주 바꾸면 불안감이 높아질 수 있다.
⑤ 친숙한 물건을 주변에 두는 것은 편안함을 느끼게 한다.
3. 	다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 변화를 위해 새로운 것을 꾸준히 시도할 필요가 있다.
② 혼자만의 시간을 통해 자기 자신을 돌아볼 수 있다.
③ 여행을 통해 다양한 경험을 할 수 있다.
④ TV 시청이 언어 발달에 도움을 줄 수 있다.
⑤ 친구와 시간을 보내는 것이 삶을 더 의미 있게 한다.
4. 	대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
5. 	대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 물병 나눠 주기 	② 준비 운동 하기
③ 경기 장소 안내하기 	④ 우승자 이름 발표하기
⑤ 달리기 연습하기
6. 	대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $22 	② $30 	③ $37 	④ $47 	⑤ $50
7. 	대화를 듣고, 남자가 Old Ridge 퍼레이드에 갈 수 없는 이유를
고르시오.
① 동생의 숙제를 도와주어야 해서
② 아르바이트를 하러 가야 해서
③ 몸이 아직 회복되지 않아서
④ 사진을 찾으러 가야 해서
⑤ 에세이를 써야 해서
8. 	대화를 듣고, Booktoon Workshop에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을
고르시오.
① 개최 장소 	② 수업 내용 	③ 특별 강연
④ 기념품 	⑤ 등록 마감일
9. 	2025 Summer Prehistoric Life Camp에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 14세부터 17세까지의 학생을 대상으로 한다.
② 2일 동안 진행된다.
③ 수렵과 채집 기술을 연습하는 활동이 있다.
④ 참가자는 캠핑 장비를 가져와야 한다.
⑤ 등록비는 환불되지 않는다.
10. 	다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 베트남어 학습 앱을
고르시오.
Language Learning Apps for Vietnamese
App Price
(per month) Level Learning
Focus
Learning
Materials
① 	A 	$13 	Beginner 	Vocabulary Newspapers
② 	B 	$15 	Beginner 	Grammar 	Newspapers
③ 	C 	$17 	Intermediate Vocabulary 	Video Clips
④ 	D 	$19 	Advanced 	Vocabulary Newspapers
⑤ 	E 	$21 	Intermediate 	Grammar 	Video Clips
11. 	대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Wait. I can’t draw any pictures from now on.
② Indeed. The group work wasn’t done yesterday.
③ Then, you need to come to class early tomorrow.
④ Not really. I’m meeting with parents next Friday.
⑤ Great. Tell everyone we’ll take a photo after class.
12. 	대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① Well, you didn’t skip breakfast this morning.
② Wonderful. I’m glad you’re feeling much better.
③ No worries. I’ll take the medicine again this evening.
④ Sorry. I hope your coughing doesn’t bother you.
⑤ Yes. Having three meals a day is good for you.
2026학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1

-- 1 of 8 --

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2 8
13. 	대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman :
① Never mind. He doesn’t like coffee at all.
② Right. It’ll make your birthday wonderful.
③ Good idea. That’s the best option we have.
④ Unfortunately, he couldn’t find me at the cafe.
⑤ Too bad. I can’t make it to the party this Sunday.
14. 	대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man :
① Okay, I will. I’m grateful for your help.
② No, I didn’t. I should’ve listened to them carefully.
③ That’s terrible. I’m not sure when the next meeting is.
④ Sounds fun! I think you should talk about the topics.
⑤ For sure. I believe you can do that.
15. 	다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Steven이 Anna에게 할 말로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Steven:
① It’s better for us to select non-fiction books.
② Our library needs more books in the education section.
③ We should add the books students want to read to the list.
④ Let’s choose the books recommended by experts.
⑤ I think you’d be happier if you read more.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 	여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① extent of international dependence on renewables
② efforts to reduce carbon emissions by country
③ wide use of solar energy in Europe
④ cost of various countries’ energy transitions
⑤ features of the world’s biggest carbon polluters
17. 	언급된 나라가 아닌 것은?
① Sweden 	② Denmark 	③ Hungary
④ Norway 	⑤ France
18. 	다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
To Whom It May Concern,
I recently visited the Lambsford History Foundation’s
exhibition about the Qukkon Gold Rush. The collection of
pictures, tools, and historical documents made the gold
miners arriving to Qukkon come to life. This reminded me
of when I lived in Qukkon and worked in the mining
industry. Because of this, I’m wondering if there are
volunteer guide positions available for this exhibition. I
can share my experiences working in the extreme cold of
Qukkon. Again, I would be thankful if you could tell me
about the availability of volunteer positions as a guide.
Sincerely,
Jonathan Hamilton
① 안내자로 자원봉사를 할 자리가 있는지 문의하려고
② 역사 박물관 근무 경력자 모집에 지원하려고
③ 전시회를 위한 예술품 기부를 부탁하려고
④ 채굴 도구 사용 설명서를 요청하려고
⑤ 전시회의 주제를 소개하려고
19. 	다음 글에 드러난 Jessie의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
The shoreline was known for having the best fishing spots
on the lake. Jessie was sitting at one of those spots, but her
fishing line still hadn’t moved an inch. With a deep sigh,
Jessie pulled out the line and cast it back into the water. Her
dream of catching a big fish was fading. “I can’t believe I
haven’t caught a fish yet. Not a single one,” she thought. Just
as she was about to give up and leave, the fishing line suddenly
became tense. Jessie excitedly held onto the fishing pole as it
began to move around wildly. Her eyes widened and her heart
began to beat faster with excitement. With a big smile, she
could feel that this was the biggest fish she had ever caught!
① disappointed → thrilled 	② indifferent → discouraged
③ jealous 	→ anxious 	④ delighted 	→ bored
⑤ relieved 	→ pleased
20. 	다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Our ability to respond to danger has been important for
survival, so feeling worried in uncertain situations is normal.
Feelings of worry, which are activated in anticipation of future
events, are often experienced in everyday situations. For
example, we may feel nervous imagining unlikely events, such
as a computer crashing during an important presentation. To
some 	extent, thinking through potential scenarios can be
helpful. When our worries exceed our control, however, they
cause us unnecessary suffering. Consider how many times you
have lost sleep thinking about a terrible situation, which, in the
end, did not actually take place. If that situation actually
occurred, it only goes to show that worrying about it did
nothing to prevent it from happening. It is worth making a
conscious effort, then, to stop worrying endlessly about events
you may not experience.
① 긴장감으로 인한 실수를 줄이기 위해 연습을 많이 해야 한다.
② 일어날 것 같지 않은 일에 대해 지나치게 걱정하지 말아야 한다.
③ 목표를 수월하게 달성하려면 계획을 구체적으로 세워야 한다.
④ 일의 과정을 즐기려면 결과에 대한 과도한 집착을 버려야 한다.
⑤ 자신의 걱정이 무엇에서 비롯되었는지 면밀히 살펴봐야 한다.
이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.

-- 2 of 8 --

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3 8
21. 	밑줄 친 the boost is grounded in fiction이 다음 글에서 의미
하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Basing your self-worth on climbing performance puts you at
the whim of external factors. These factors may be random
and misleading. Comparison is one source of illusion. Perhaps
you felt that you performed well on a certain climb because
your partner was having an off day and found the climbing
very difficult. You found it only slightly difficult and conclude
that you were climbing quite well, when in fact you were
climbing no better than usual. Or, your partner was at the top
of his game. You felt weak in comparison, when in fact,
objectively, you put in a very strong performance. Environmental
factors may be involved. Perhaps you mastered your day’s
objective due to especially favorable conditions, such as low
humidity, when in fact, you really didn’t climb particularly well.
In all these cases, the good or bad feelings you have are not
based on something you can take credit for. If the performances
boost your self-worth, the boost is grounded in fiction.
* whim: 변덕 	** illusion: 착각 	*** humidity: 습도
① perceptions of self-growth vary from person to person
② your self-confidence is an outcome of constant effort
③ the pride you take in your achievement is unreliable
④ performance comparison to partners is demotivating
⑤ ambitious goals help you improve performance
22. 	다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Information and meaning are, clearly, not the same thing.
The former refers to uninterpreted data or sensory states whose
probability in a certain situation can be easily measured; the
latter refers to the interpretation of the data or sensory states,
including the special kinds of nuances and values that the
information entails, or is intended to have, in the given situation.
This applies to any type of information, from alarm signals to
sophisticated statements. Take, for instance, a coin-tossing
game in which it is decided that throwing three heads in a row
constitutes a win. If a certain player ends up consistently with
the desired outcome, defeating all who challenge that player,
then we tend to interpret the outcome either as the work of
Fortune, or else as clever and undetectable cheating on the part
of the winning player. Interpretation is at the core of everything
we do, think about, and feel.
* sophisticated: 정교한
① 우리는 정보를 해석함으로써 의미를 만들어 낸다.
② 우리는 경험적 확률에 근거하여 미래를 예측한다.
③ 정보의 양이 너무 많으면 정확한 분석이 어려워진다.
④ 정보의 진위 여부를 판단할 때 출처 확인이 필수이다.
⑤ 정보 해석에 개인의 감정이 개입되면 의미가 왜곡된다.
23. 	다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
The purpose of class discussions is to encourage you to be
an active participant, not a passive recorder. Much of the
emphasis in a discussion is on getting students involved in
thinking, 	reacting, 	and 	responding. 	These 	are 	important
intellectual activities in the learning process, for through them
you are supposed to discover and express your opinions.
Writing is an invaluable tool for accomplishing these tasks.
Unfortunately, too many times, when class discussion begins,
pens and pencils go down. Admittedly, it is considerably more
difficult to take notes from discussions than from lectures, for,
unlike lectures, discussions tend to be disorganized and difficult
to follow. Also, students usually don’t know how much of
what other students are saying is important. And if you are an
active participant, it is not easy to take notes and formulate
what you want to say. But note taking in discussions is not
only manageable, it is also important. Note taking helps to keep
you active and alert; it allows you to impose some organization
on the discussion; and it can prepare you to speak.
* impose: 부과하다
① reasons to standardize procedures for class discussions
② strategies to improve note-taking skills for public speaking
③ significance of note taking for active engagement in discussion
④ effectiveness of summarizing and reviewing notes after class
⑤ benefits of brainstorming to generate ideas for writing tasks
24. 	다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Food, as we all know, is essential for human life. It also is
the basis for several major industries found in many countries
around the world such as in agriculture, food processing, food
retailing and food service. For millennia, the focus of those
involved with food as a human and economic phenomenon
was on its production, preservation, distribution, pricing and
other practical concerns. But in the late 18th century this
began to change. Food became more than just a life necessity.
Restaurants began to be developed, initially in France but
eventually in other nations, as a distinct institution offering
people dining choices and table service, the opportunity for
socialization and, over time, a finer and finer atmosphere. The
rise of restaurants eventually led to a class of diners who
prided themselves on being critics of taste, food and cooking.
Brillat-Savarin is probably the best known of the ‘culinary
philosophers’ or, 	in 	today’s 	parlance, 	a 	‘foodie’. 	One 	of
Brillat-Savarin’s better known sayings was, ‘[t]ell me what
you eat, and I’ll tell you who you are.’
* culinary: 요리의 	** parlance: 용어
① Changing Appetites: The Return of Fine Dining
② Beyond Mere Necessity: The Rise of Food Culture
③ Tips for Choosing Restaurants for Social Occasions
④ Why Table Manners Matter: Food and Class Identity
⑤ How Industrialization Is Taking Over Food Production

-- 3 of 8 --

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4 8
25. 	다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows trends in adult participation in
education and training in five OECD countries in 2016 and
2022. ① Among these countries, the percentage of adults in the
Netherlands who participated in education and training was
the highest in each year listed in the graph. ② In Germany, the
percentage of adults who participated in education and training
in 2022 was higher than that in 2016. ③ In 2022, the percentage
of adults who participated in education and training was lower
in Spain than in Germany. ④ In Italy, the percentage of adults
who participated in education and training in 2016 was lower
than that in 2022. ⑤ In each year listed, the percentage of
adults in Greece who participated in education and training
was less than 20%.
26. 	Mary Budd Rowe에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
Mary Budd Rowe was best known for her achievements in
science education. When she was a middle school student, she
met Albert Einstein and was inspired by him to study science.
In 1954, she graduated from the University of California at
Berkeley with a master’s degree in zoology. Then she earned
her 	doctorate 	degree 	in 	science 	education 	from 	Stanford
University in 1964. Through her research, Rowe discovered
that 	learning 	could 	be 	improved 	by 	increasing 	teachers’
average “wait time” for students’ responses. During her career,
she directed a science education program in Harlem. She also
served 	as 	President 	of 	the 	National 	Science 	Teachers
Association. In 1990, she published her book, The Process of
Knowing. Throughout her career, she practiced Einstein’s
advice, “Science is exploring, and exploring is fun.” When she
died in 1996, she was remembered as one of the leading
figures in the field of science education.
① Albert Einstein을 만났을 때 중학생이었다.
② 1964년에 동물학으로 박사 학위를 받았다.
③ Harlem에서 과학 교육 프로그램을 감독했다.
④ 1990년에 The Process of Knowing을 출판했다.
⑤ 과학 교육 분야의 선도적인 인물로 기억되었다.
27. 	Hanok-inspired Cultural Product Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Hanok-inspired Cultural Product Contest
Explore your creativity by designing practical products!
Theme: The beauty of Hanok
Applicants: Artists and social enterprises
Benefit: Selected products will be sold in Hanok village
souvenir shops.
Schedule
When 	What to Do
Application June
10—15
Download the application form
from our website and upload a
completed one.
Product
Submission
July
14—18
Bring the product in person to our
office and do not send it by post.
Selection
Announcement July 28 	Check the results on our website.
※ For more information, including selection methods, please
visit our website, www.pre*serve*H.kr.
① 주제는 한옥의 아름다움이다.
② 예술가와 사회적 기업이 응모할 수 있다.
③ 선정된 작품은 한옥 마을 기념품점에서 판매될 것이다.
④ 응모 신청서 양식은 웹사이트에서 다운로드해야 한다.
⑤ 응모자는 작품을 우편으로 제출해야 한다.
28. 	2025 Science Gamification Challenge에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하는 것은?
2025 Science Gamification Challenge
Learn science through games at Evernville Science Park!
Participants: Ages 8—13
Date and Time: June 7, 9:00 a.m.—11:30 a.m.
Guidelines
∙Download the game map from the website.
∙Start the first mission at the main gate.
∙Complete each mission using your knowledge of science.
∙Go back to the main gate after you complete all five
missions.
Reservation: Online reservation is required.
Participation Fee: $20 (lunch not included)
Note: Only the first participant who completes all five missions
will receive a medal.
※ For more information, please visit www.*s* gc*.com.
① 3시간 동안 진행된다.
② 첫 번째 미션을 정문에서 시작한다.
③ 온라인으로 예약하지 않아도 된다.
④ 참가비에 점심이 포함되어 있다.
⑤ 모든 참가자는 메달을 받을 것이다.

-- 4 of 8 --

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5 8
29. 	다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Changes in the degree of closeness ① are quite important in
managing emotional intensity. Take, for example, emotions
induced by television. Closeness and familiarity are important
in making the fictional environment more ② real. Accordingly,
most TV shows are set in the present or in a time within the
memory of the viewers. Most characters are supposed to be
types with whom we are familiar. Such closeness and familiarity
make it easier for us ③ perceive the imaginary story to be a
real one. In other circumstances, such as when violence is
shown on TV, the closeness variable is used to reduce emotional
intensity. Television entertainment tends to place social problems
involving violence in another time and place, letting us watch
those 	fictionalized 	characters 	search 	for 	solutions 	to 	our
problems in settings ④ safely distanced from our own. When
violence occurs in a contemporary setting, it is generally the
product of the interaction of police and criminals ― again, it
is ⑤ removed from the lives of good citizenry.
30. 	다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
Gaining an audience for your writing involves not just
finding a voice but ensuring that voice resonates with your
intended readers. Entrepreneurs understand the importance of
building a brand that makes them memorable and distinct from
their competitors, drawing customers to their products or
services. 	They 	achieve 	this 	by ① pinpointing 	their 	target
audience, crafting a unique value proposition, and shaping a
recognizable identity. While scholars might initially find these
entrepreneurial 	concepts ② alien, 	they 	actually 	engage 	in
similar practices when they set themselves apart in their
academic writing. Consider the typical literature review and
motivation 	section 	of 	a scholarly 	article ― the aim 	is 	to
highlight ③ gaps in existing research and position oneself as
the 	one 	who 	will 	address 	these 	overlooked 	areas. 	The
challenge, as Labaree suggests, is not just in developing
innovative ideas but in ④ cultivating a distinctive voice that
makes readers think, “Ah, this sounds like [the author].” It’s about
balancing the expression of your ideas with the development
of a unique voice that leaves a ⑤ temporary impression on
your audience.
* resonate: 공명하다 	** entrepreneur: 기업가
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. 	The human psychology and education communities (as
well as some animal researchers!) have been against referring
to “teaching” when describing social learning in animals,
mainly because teaching implies a level of 	on
the part of the model that is difficult to measure in animals.
Nonetheless, there has been a movement within the animal
cognition community to say that animals can, in fact, teach
one another. For example, skilled ants engage in a behavior
called tandem running, in which they touch their bodies to the
body of a novice ant as they lay down chemical trails,
presumably to assist the newcomer with route learning. Killer
whales also repeat the same seal hunting technique in front of
their 	offspring, 	sometimes 	without 	even 	killing 	the 	seal,
leading researchers to ask why they would repeatedly catch
and 	release 	a 	seal 	if 	they 	were 	not 	planning 	to 	eat 	it.
Considering the amount of energy they’d have to expend,
there would need to be a good reason, and that reason might
be teaching.
* presumably: 추측상 	** offspring: 자손
① comfort 	② courage
③ frustration 	④ inventiveness
⑤ intentionality
32. 	Writers 	often 	give 	us 	the 	impression 	that 	they 	have
described the faces of their characters, when in fact they have
simply given you an outline to fill in. Of Esch, the most
important character in Hermann Broch’s masterpiece The
Sleepwalkers, we learn only that he has big teeth. Even so, we
don’t feel as if his face is a dentate blankness. Most often, we
mistake being told what effect someone’s appearance has
for an account of that appearance. The poet Mallarmé’s advice
― Peindre non la chose, mais l’effet qu’elle produit (‘Paint
not the thing itself but the effect it produces’) sounds like
a self-denying ordinance. Actually it is a rather clever way
out of an intractable problem. When, in one of his novels,
Evelyn Waugh says of a new character, that ‘he had just the
kind of appearance one would expect a young man of his
type to have’ and nothing else, you still feel as if you
. [3점]
* dentate: 이가 있는 	** ordinance: 법령
*** intractable: 다루기 힘든
① have been told exactly what he looks like
② have become a member of his social group
③ already know what will happen to him in the story
④ have been given precise details about his behavior
⑤ recognize the core characteristics of his personality

-- 5 of 8 --

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6 8
33. 	When we narrow, we’re redirecting all of our computing
power to the handful of processes that matter. It’s as if to help
with our slow Wi-Fi, we disconnect our phone and tablet, just
so that our video conference call won’t lag. Narrowing also
helps 	with 	goal 	attainment. 	It 	cuts 	out 	all 	of 	the 	other
distractions and places the most important goal front and
center. When we home in, we increase motivational intensity,
reinforcing that what’s in front of us is what we should be
after. For a brief moment, the trade-off can be worthwhile, but
when we 	, we start to miss
cues and signals. We get locked in on one path without being
able to step back and see a better route. When we’re stuck
narrowed in for too long, accidents go up and performance
drops. We miss hearing alarms that signal there’s a problem
elsewhere.
* lag: 지체되다
① get distracted by too many sources
② rely too heavily on digital devices
③ randomly switch between tasks
④ remain zoomed in for too long
⑤ fail to control our feelings
34. 	One word is inextricably associated with geography: where.
That is because geography starts from the premise that it
matters where something takes place on Earth’s surface. The
key questions are not simply “where” questions, though; they
are “why there” and “so what” questions. Getting to such
questions means taking spatial arrangements, variations, and
interconnections seriously. Engaging in even the simplest
day-to-day 	activity 	requires 	some 	appreciation 	of 	spatial
circumstances ― where to find food and services, how to get
to work places, and the like. Moving up in scale, without some
awareness of 	,
it is difficult to make reasoned business or policy judgments,
make sense of events, or grasp some of the basic forces
shaping life on the planet. Locating a new store or public
service requires taking into consideration population distributions,
the location of roads and utilities, socio-economic patterns,
and more. Understanding why and where migration happens
requires consideration of the political organization of territory,
the spatial consequences of discrimination, socio-economic
patterns, and the layout of the physical environment. [3점]
* inextricably: 풀 수 없게 	** premise: 전제
① why cross-cultural conflicts will increase
② how phenomena are arranged on Earth’s surface
③ when the Earth’s natural resources will be exhausted
④ which places on Earth are damaged by climate change
⑤ who has the authority to make decisions about territories
35. 	다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
A 	genuine 	glacier 	must 	be 	permanent. 	Generally, 	this
implies that sufficient fresh snow must accumulate during the
cold months to offset melting during the summer, although on
a 	year-to-year 	basis, 	glaciers 	may 	expand 	or 	contract,
depending on local and global climatic conditions. ① Today,
most glaciers around the world are melting because of the
warming climate, and it appears that the rate of melting is
accelerating. ② This has been documented spectacularly in
places such as the Alps, where historical records have been
kept and dated sketches and photographs are available to
compare with the present extent of ice. ③ Even over periods
as short as a few decades, satellite images show that dramatic
reduction of mountain glaciers has occurred in the Andes,
the 	Himalayas, 	and 	elsewhere. ④ The 	various 	rocks 	and
minerals contained in glaciers have become a popular subject
of science projects in schools. ⑤ It is estimated that many
small mountain glaciers will disappear completely within ten
to twenty years unless there is a sudden and unexpected
change in the present warming trend.
* offset: 상쇄하다
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
36.
If we take an evolutionary look at our beginnings, we see
a life in which high levels of physical activity were required
for survival.
(A) There are fewer manual jobs, we do not need to travel on
foot, we do not need to hunt and harvest for our food, and
many domestic chores have been mechanized. While these
changes have created many benefits for our longevity and
quality of life, they have also created many problems.
(B) Lack of sufficient physical activity has now been linked to
at least 17 unhealthy conditions, almost all of which are
chronic diseases or considered risk factors for chronic
diseases. Adrianne Hardman has summarized this serious
situation for public health: “Physical inactivity is a waste
of human potential for health and well-being.”
(C) Even one century ago, most people needed to be physically
active to work, to travel, and to take care of homes and
families. Our modern world has engineered such activity
out of our lives.
* chore: 일 	** chronic: 만성의
①
③
⑤
(A)
(B)
(C)
－
－
－
(C)
(C)
(B)
－
－
－
(B)
(A)
(A)
②
④
(B)
(C)
－
－
(A)
(A)
－
－
(C)
(B)

-- 6 of 8 --

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7 8
37.
A good example of chaos is the magnetic pendulum sold
as an executive toy. It has four magnets arranged in a
square at the base and a pendulum that swings back and
forth between them.
(A) In order to produce chaos, the iteration has to be within
what is called a nonlinear system. Nor are all nonlinear
systems chaotic: to become so they need to be pushed
beyond a certain point, called a bifurcation. Before that
point is reached they may behave in a quite orderly fashion.
(B) Release the pendulum and note the magnets that it visits,
and in what order. If the pendulum is released from the same
position a second time, the pattern of movement may at
first be the same but soon it will become completely
different. In fact, the pattern of its movement is chaotic.
(C) No matter how much care is taken to start the pendulum
in the same position, it will visit an entirely different set of
points on the two occasions. Chaotic systems are generated
by iteration, though not all iteration leads to chaos. [3점]
* pendulum: 추(錘) 	** iteration: 반복
*** bifurcation: 분기(分岐)
①
③
⑤
(A)
(B)
(C)
－
－
－
(C)
(C)
(B)
－
－
－
(B)
(A)
(A)
②
④
(B)
(C)
－
－
(A)
(A)
－
－
(C)
(B)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
But cute and beautiful designs also have downsides.
Research finds that people show a strong visceral interest in
and desire to approach and own cute-looking and beautiful
(elegant) designs. ( ① ) However, cute and beautiful designs
elicit two very different motivations. ( ② ) A cute product or
package design elicits a nurturing motivation ― a desire to
take care of and keep the product, to hold it dear to our hearts
and never let it go. ( ③ ) The beautiful product or package
design elicits a self-expressive, or signaling, motivation ― a
desire to express oneself to others through product ownership.
( ④ ) Certain types of cute products can be associated with a
lack 	of 	sophistication 	or 	seriousness, 	which 	can 	reduce
performance 	expectations 	(lowering 	perceived 	enablement
benefits). ( ⑤ ) Beautiful-looking designs may not attract
attention over time because people become desensitized to
them.
* visceral: 본능적인 	** elicit: 이끌어 내다
39.
They might be sitting still as they imagine all of this walking
back and forth along their path; but they are reliving, at
least in their imagination, the movement of their feet.
Researchers 	are 	studying 	how 	our 	everyday 	physical
experiences in the world contribute to our understanding of
mathematical 	concepts. ( ① ) The 	experience 	of 	walking
along a path, for example, can be a metaphor for thinking about
arithmetic. ( ② ) The path starts at some point 0 and as
children walk along, every step takes them 1 unit further from
the starting point; they can even take half steps or skip along
two steps at a time. ( ③ ) If they want to imagine what it might
mean to add 5 and 9, they could think of first walking 9 steps
and then walking 5 more. ( ④ ) But that also helps them
think about what 14－3 might mean because they can imagine
walking backwards. ( ⑤ ) If they close their eyes, they might
even imagine the shape of the path, the smell of the trees, and
the sound that is made when they step on the dried leaves. [3점]
* arithmetic: 산수
40. 	다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
A serious deterioration in people’s working lives would
be deeply disturbing to 	the social order. Indeed, few
consequences 	of 	technological 	change 	would 	be 	as
dangerous. Today, the world of work is the main way that
we share out the fruits of growth: for most people, their
job is their main, if not their only, source of income.
Technological unemployment would weaken that longstanding
arrangement, encouraging an even more extreme version
of inequality in which some people receive more income
than others and many receive nothing at all. Nor would the
disturbance be only economic. For many people, their
work is both a source of income and of meaning. And with
that in mind, the threat is even broader: not only that the
labor market might be hollowed out, leaving some unable
to find a good job and a reliable income, but that this sense
of fulfilment that some people are fortunate to feel in their
jobs might be hollowed out as well, leaving them unable to
find purpose and live a satisfying life.
* deterioration: 악화 	** hollow: 속이 비게 하다
󰀻
By creating unemployment, technology would upset the
social 	order, 	affecting 	the 	(A) 	of wealth 	and
possibly eliminating the emotional 	(B) 	that some
discover in work.
(A) 	(B) 	(A) 	(B)
① distribution 	…… emptiness 	② distribution…… rewards
③ concentration…… conflicts 	④ investment …… challenges
⑤ investment 	…… growth

-- 7 of 8 --

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8 8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
In technological design, an aspiration towards seamlessness
aims to make the technological experience for humans blend
seamlessly into our everyday lives. Essentially, this aspiration
aims towards experiences where people are no longer (a) aware
of the technology, the interface or the differences between
human-technology and human-human interaction. Considering
the metaphor of seams in clothing, we can say that we aspire
to seamless aesthetics by stitching the seams closely, pressing
them flat and making sure they are (b) hidden on the inside
so that we wear clothing rather than pieces of fabric. When
designers and engineers talk about technological seamlessness,
they are often referring to ease of use and convenience. For
example, in interface design, an aspiration towards seamlessness
(c) ensures the experience for the user flows and is not
stressful or irritating. Most of us would have had experiences
of (d) poor interface designs or apps in workplaces that make
things more complicated and irritating, and have longed for
more seamless interfaces. Technological seamlessness can
also include less visible screens in new technologies, or
virtual reality technologies with a seamless technological
design. The aim is to immerse the user experience such that
the visual interaction might be described as inside the screen
rather than a body interacting with a digital console or object
as separate entities. Similarly, seamlessness in humanoid
robotic design aims to make humanoids (e) distinguishable
from a human body.
* seamlessness: 이음매 없음 	** aesthetics: 미학
*** immerse: 담그다
41. 	윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Blending In: When Tech Stops Feeling Like Tech
② Digital Interfaces Are Becoming Too Complicated!
③ Out-of-body Experience: A History of Virtual Reality
④ How Software Designs Affect Work Productivity
⑤ Wearable Technology in Contemporary Fashion
42. 	밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은
것은? [3점]
① (a) 	② (b) 	③ (c) 	④ (d) 	⑤ (e)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
“Hi! I’m over here!” shouted Laura, waving brightly at
Cathy at the entrance of Darlingdale Farmer’s Market. Seeing
her friend, Cathy rushed over in delight. Cathy had recently
moved into Laura’s town, and this was going to be (a) her
first experience at a real farmer’s market. Born and raised in
a big city, where large supermarkets were more common,
Cathy had never had a chance to buy freshly-picked fruits or
vegetables.
(B)
Carrying 	the 	bags 	of peaches, 	Cathy 	came 	back 	and
noticed Laura holding a box of blueberries and jars of jam.
“Cathy, those peaches look delicious! I bought some blueberries.
Would you like to go to my place and make blueberry
pancakes together?” Laura asked. “Yes, that’s an excellent
idea!” replied Cathy happily. As they walked out of the
market, Cathy thanked her friend for the special experience,
saying “(b) I 	really 	love 	this 	place! 	Thank 	you 	for 	the
wonderful day.”
(C)
Entering the market, Laura said, “Let me show you around.
Are you ready?” Cathy answered excitedly, “Absolutely! I’m
going to buy some fresh peaches!” The market was already
crowded with people of all ages. “Cathy, you can taste the
best of the season here,” said Laura. Cathy smiled and began
to look around. Meanwhile, Laura found some strawberry
jam for sale. She walked over to buy some. Curious to explore
more, Cathy said, “While (c) you’re buying jam, I’ll look
around the market and get some peaches.”
(D)
Wandering away from Laura, Cathy began to search for
peaches. Cathy walked past booths of fresh flowers and
hand-made soaps, which smelled heavenly. From a fruit stand,
(d) she picked out some beautiful, ripe peaches. The fruit seller
told her, “Those peaches are a great choice because they’re
only here until this week. If you miss them now, (e) you’ll
have to wait another year for the season.” Hearing that, Cathy
said, “Oh, I’ll get some more then! They’re really cheap!” She
bought two bags of peaches.
43. 	주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
①
③
⑤
(B)
(C)
(D)
－
－
－
(D)
(D)
(C)
－
－
－
(C)
(B)
(B)
②
④
(C)
(D)
－
－
(B)
(B)
－
－
(D)
(C)
44. 	밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른
것은?
① (a) 	② (b) 	③ (c) 	④ (d) 	⑤ (e)
45. 	윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Cathy는 대도시에서 태어나고 성장했다.
② Laura와 Cathy는 블루베리 팬케이크를 만들기로 했다.
③ 시장은 다양한 나이의 사람들로 붐볐다.
④ Laura는 판매 중인 딸기 잼을 발견했다.
⑤ Cathy는 복숭아 가격이 비싸다고 생각했다.
* 확인 사항
◦ 답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.

-- 8 of 8 --

