1 8
1번부터 	17번까지는 	듣고 	답하는 	문제입니다. 	1번부터
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 	다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르
시오.
① 문자로 투표하는 방법을 설명하려고
② 오디션 프로그램 지원자를 모집하려고
③ 오디션 프로그램 최종 우승자를 발표하려고
④ 오디션 프로그램 투표 방식의 변경을 알리려고
⑤ 공식 모바일 앱 서비스의 일시적 중단을 공지하려고
2. 	대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 여러 구독 서비스를 통해 다양한 콘텐츠를 즐길 수 있다.
② 스트리밍 서비스를 연간 결제하면 구독료를 아낄 수 있다.
③ 여러 기기에서 로그인할 때는 계정 보안에 유의해야 한다.
④ 구매 목록을 미리 작성하면 불필요한 소비를 줄일 수 있다.
⑤ 사용하지 않는 구독 서비스를 해지해서 돈을 절약해야 한다.
3. 	다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르
시오.
① 아침을 챙겨 먹으면 체중 관리에 도움이 된다.
② 규칙적인 운동으로 혈액 순환을 개선할 수 있다.
③ 잠들기 전 따뜻한 목욕은 편안한 수면을 돕는다.
④ 식사 중 지나친 수분 섭취는 소화에 방해가 된다.
⑤ 아침에 가장 먼저 따뜻한 물을 마시면 건강에 좋다.
4. 	대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르
시오.
③
①
②
④
⑤
5. 	대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 전단지 인쇄하기 	② 기념품 포장하기
③ 기념품 주문하기 	④ 동물 보호소에 연락하기
⑤ 입양 신청서 준비하기
6. 	대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $90 	② $110 	③ $120 	④ $210 	⑤ $240
7. 	대화를 듣고, 여자가 이번 주에 춤 영상을 업로드하지 못하는
이유를 고르시오.
① 몸 상태가 좋지 않아서
② 동영상 편집이 오래 걸려서
③ 장소 예약을 하지 못해서
④ 파트너와 일정이 맞지 않아서
⑤ 곡을 선정하지 못해서
8. 	대화를 듣고, Harmony Rental Shop에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을
고르시오.
① 취급 악기 	② 위치 	③ 악기 대여 비용
④ 악기 수령 방법 	⑤ 영업 시간
9. 	DNA Discovery Program에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 16세부터 18세까지의 학생들이 참여할 수 있다.
② 4월 7일에 시작하여 8주 동안 운영된다.
③ 모든 실험은 숙련된 강사들의 도움으로 진행된다.
④ 이번 달 말까지 등록한 사람은 10% 할인을 받는다.
⑤ 웹사이트에서 추가 학습 자료를 받을 수 있다.
10. 	다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 주문할 전자책 단말기를
고르시오.
eBook Reader
Model 	Price Screen Size
(inches)
Memory
Storage (GB) Waterproof
① 	A 	$110 	6 	8 	○
② 	B 	$130 	14 	16 	×
③ 	C 	$210 	7 	32 	×
④ 	D 	$240 	8 	32 	○
⑤ 	E 	$330 	10 	64 	○
11. 	대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Thanks. I’ll have to take the stairs during that time.
② Good. I’m glad the elevator maintenance is finally over.
③ Okay. I’ll call and ask when they’re fixing the elevator.
④ Yeah. They should’ve put up the notice in the elevator.
⑤ Great. I’m happy they’re fixing it in the afternoon.
12. 	대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Not really. I wonder where the exhibition is held.
② That’s not right. I haven’t seen the exhibition yet.
③ Not sure. I hope his paintings will be exhibited someday.
④ You’d better not. The museum wasn’t crowded at all.
⑤ I think so. If I were you, I would go on weekdays.
2025학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	제 3 교시
1

-- 1 of 8 --

2 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
2 8
13. 	대화를 	듣고, 	남자의 	마지막 	말에 	대한 	여자의 	응답으로 	가장
적절한 	것을 	고르시오. 	[3점]
Woman:
① 	Sure. 	Let 	me 	check 	if 	there 	are 	any 	empty 	bottles 	to 	bring.
② 	Certainly. 	The 	store 	sells 	items 	in 	packs, 	not 	by 	weight.
③ 	Of 	course. 	I 	always 	buy 	items 	without 	plastic 	packaging.
④ 	Maybe 	next 	time. 	We 	already 	have 	plenty 	of 	shampoo.
⑤ 	I 	see. 	That’s 	why 	zerowaste 	stores 	are 	hard 	to 	find.
14. 	대화를 	듣고, 	여자의 	마지막 	말에 	대한 	남자의 	응답으로 	가장
적절한 	것을 	고르시오. 	[3점]
Man:
① 	You’re 	right. 	I’ll 	suggest 	the 	teamwork 	idea 	to 	council 	members.
② 	That 	works. 	I’ll 	make 	sure 	they 	participate 	individually.
③ 	I’d 	rather 	not. 	I’m 	not 	really 	into 	treasure 	hunting.
④ 	No 	worries. 	I 	heard 	the 	students 	enjoyed 	the 	event.
⑤ 	Cool. 	I 	hope 	many 	freshmen 	will 	join 	the 	student 	council.
15. 	다음 	상황 	설명을 	듣고, 	Emma가 	Luke에게 	할 	말로 	가장 	적절한
것을 	고르시오.
Emma:
① 	Let’s 	participate 	as 	volunteers 	in 	the 	marathon 	event.
② 	It’d 	be 	great 	if 	you 	could 	give 	me 	some 	running 	tips.
③ 	How 	about 	signing 	up 	for 	a 	marathon 	to 	stay 	motivated?
④ 	You 	need 	proper 	running 	shoes 	to 	reduce 	the 	risk 	of 	injury.
⑤ 	Begin 	with 	a 	steady 	pace 	and 	slowly 	build 	up 	your 	distance.
[16 	~ 	17] 	다음을 	듣고, 	물음에 	답하시오.
16. 	여자가 	하는 	말의 	주제로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
① 	importance 	of 	visual 	communication 	among 	animals
② 	truths 	behind 	common 	misconceptions 	about 	animals
③ 	ways 	animals 	recognize 	members 	of 	their 	own 	species
④ 	strategic 	uses 	of 	colors 	animals 	employ 	for 	survival
⑤ 	how 	animals’ 	perceptions 	exceed 	those 	of 	humans
17. 	언급된 	동물이 	아닌 	것은?
① 	bulls 	② 	bats 	③ 	dogs
④ 	leopards 	⑤ 	polar 	bears
이제 	듣기 	문제가 	끝났습니다. 	18번부터는 	문제지의 	지시
에 	따라 	답을 	하시기 	바랍니다.
18. 	다음 	글의 	목적으로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
Dear 	School 	Officials,
Thank 	you 	for 	deciding 	to 	participate 	in 	the 	upcoming 	2025
Student 	Art 	Exhibition. 	Our 	organization’s 	event 	has 	been 	a
platform 	for 	showcasing 	the 	artistic 	talents 	of 	young 	students
for 	a 	decade. 	After 	reviewing 	the 	applications 	we’ve 	received,
we 	can’t 	wait 	to 	exhibit 	your 	students’ 	work. 	However, 	please
note 	that 	there 	has 	been 	a 	change 	to 	the 	submission 	deadline
for 	your 	students’ 	work. 	The 	deadline 	is 	April 	15th 	instead 	of
March 	28th. 	Please 	send 	the 	work 	to 	the 	address 	of 	which 	we
have 	already 	notified 	you. 	Thank 	you.
① 	전시회 	운영 	기간을 	안내하려고
② 	작품 	제출 	마감일 	변경을 	알리려고
③ 	학생 	예술 	단체 	가입을 	독려하려고
④ 	전시회에 	공개할 	작품을 	발표하려고
⑤ 	전시되는 	작품의 	선정 	기준을 	공지하려고
19. 	다음 	글에 	드러난 	Sam의 	심경 	변화로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
Sam 	had 	always 	dreamed 	of 	becoming 	a 	musical 	actor, 	and
today 	was 	his 	big 	chance 	— 	a 	lifechanging 	audition. 	He 	had
practiced 	endlessly 	and 	was 	perfectly 	ready. 	He 	couldn’t 	even
think 	of 	not 	getting 	the 	role. 	When 	his 	name 	was 	called, 	Sam
stepped 	onto 	the 	stage, 	with 	his 	head 	held 	high 	and 	his
shoulders 	held 	back. 	The 	judges’ 	eyes 	were 	fixed 	on 	him 	as
he 	appeared 	on 	the 	stage. 	But 	then, 	without 	warning, 	his 	mind
went 	completely 	blank. 	The 	opening 	line 	he 	had 	rehearsed 	so
many 	times 	didn’t 	come 	to 	him. 	He 	opened 	his 	mouth, 	but 	no
sound 	came 	out. 	Frustration 	started 	to 	set 	in. 	In 	the 	end, 	Sam
couldn’t 	believe 	that 	he 	couldn’t 	say 	a 	single 	line.
① 	excited 	→ 	jealous 	② 	confident 	→ 	frustrated
③ 	nervous 	→ 	relieved 	④ 	exhausted 	→ 	refreshed
⑤ 	indifferent 	→ 	grateful
20. 	다음 	글에서 	필자가 	주장하는 	바로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
People 	have 	an 	antipersuasion 	radar 	or 	defense 	system 	that
goes 	off 	when 	someone 	is 	trying 	to 	persuade 	them. 	The 	more
something 	or 	someone 	disagrees 	with 	them, 	the 	less 	likely
they 	are 	to 	listen. 	Consequently, 	one 	reason 	change 	is 	so 	hard
is 	that 	people 	are 	unwilling 	to 	even 	consider 	information 	that
goes 	against 	their 	beliefs. 	As 	a 	result, 	when 	dealing 	with
opposing 	viewpoints, 	being 	a 	bit 	more 	indirect 	can 	often 	be
more 	effective. 	Rather 	than 	starting 	with 	information, 	start 	by
encouraging 	people 	to 	be 	more 	open 	minded 	and 	receptive.
This 	is 	why 	expressing 	doubt 	can 	help. 	Showing 	that 	we’re
conflicted 	or 	uncertain 	makes 	us 	seem 	less 	threatening.
Expressing 	doubt 	about 	one’s 	own 	view 	acknowledges 	that
conflicting 	beliefs 	are 	valid, 	making 	the 	other 	side 	feel
validated 	and 	more 	willing 	to 	listen. 	It 	recognizes 	that 	issues
are 	complicated 	or 	nuanced, 	which 	increases 	receptiveness.
Uncertainty 	signals 	an 	openness 	to 	other 	perspectives. 	So
particularly 	when 	issues 	are 	controversial 	or 	people 	are 	dug 	in,
expressing 	a 	little 	doubt 	can 	actually 	be 	more 	persuasive.
① 	불확실한 	상황을 	피하려면 	계획을 	철저히 	세워야 	한다.
② 	상대를 	변화시키려면 	정확한 	정보를 	먼저 	제공해야 	한다.
③ 	누군가 	자신을 	일방적으로 	설득하려 	하면 	이를 	경계해야 	한다.
④ 	자신의 	주장을 	관철하고자 	할 	때는 	본론으로 	바로 	들어가야 	한다.
⑤ 	나와 	다른 	의견에 	설득력이 	있으려면 	간접적인 	태도를 	보여야 	한다.

-- 2 of 8 --

고 	3 	영어 	영역 	3
3 8
21. 	밑줄 	친 	the 	tree 	was 	cut 	in 	the 	middle이 	다음 	글에서 	의미
하는 	바로 	가장 	적절한 	것은? 	[3점]
The 	unity 	of 	science 	and 	philosophy 	in 	the 	old 	classical 	sense
was 	perhaps 	best 	described 	by 	the 	famous 	tree 	of 	Descartes:
The 	roots 	of 	this 	tree 	corresponded 	to 	metaphysics 	(the
intelligible 	principles), 	the 	trunk 	to 	physics 	(statements 	of
intermediate 	generality), 	and 	the 	branches 	and 	fruit 	to 	what 	we
would 	call 	applied 	science. 	He 	regarded 	the 	whole 	system 	of
science 	and 	philosophy 	as 	we 	today 	regard 	science 	alone; 	he
felt 	that 	the 	metaphysical 	principles 	were 	ultimately 	justified 	by
their 	“fruits,” 	not 	merely 	by 	their 	selfevidence. 	What 	we 	today
call 	applied 	science 	consisted 	for 	him 	not 	only 	in 	mechanics 	but
also 	in 	medicine 	and 	ethics. 	The 	difficulty 	was 	that 	from 	the
general 	principles 	of 	Cartesian 	or 	Aristotelian 	sciencephilosophy
no 	results 	could 	be 	derived 	which 	were 	precisely 	in 	agreement
with 	observation, 	but 	these 	principles 	seemed 	to 	be 	intelligible
and 	plausible. 	So 	the 	tree 	was 	cut 	in 	the 	middle. 	For 	the
derivation 	of 	technical 	results, 	it 	was 	necessary 	to 	start 	from
the 	physical 	principles 	in 	the 	trunk. 	Science 	in 	the 	new 	sense
was 	to 	think 	only 	of 	how 	the 	fruits 	would 	develop 	from 	the
trunk 	without 	regard 	to 	the 	roots.
* 	Cartesian: 	데카르트의 	** 	plausible: 	그럴듯한
① 	Science 	detached 	itself 	from 	philosophical 	foundations 	and
shifted 	to 	deriving 	outcomes 	based 	on 	physical 	principles.
② 	Metaphysics 	became 	the 	first 	priority 	above 	all 	as
practical 	results 	took 	precedence 	over 	intelligible 	theory.
③ 	Results 	consistent 	with 	the 	observation 	were 	the 	utmost
priority 	in 	Cartesian 	sciencephilosophy.
④ 	Applied 	science 	moved 	toward 	being 	less 	reliant 	on 	both
metaphysical 	and 	physical 	principles.
⑤ 	Science 	deemphasized 	ethical 	considerations 	in 	favor 	of
raw 	observations.
22. 	다음 	글의 	요지로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
Good 	narrative 	writing 	is 	often 	as 	much 	technique 	as 	it 	is
talent, 	sometimes 	more. 	The 	best 	narrative 	nonfiction 	writers
often 	turn 	to 	timehonored 	tools 	of 	fiction 	writers 	for 	effect:
plot 	and 	pacing, 	character 	and 	drama, 	and, 	yes, 	suspense. 	And
they 	understand 	that 	a 	good 	story 	just 	can’t 	spread 	out 	in 	all
directions 	like 	a 	serving 	of 	spaghetti. 	The 	story 	needs 	form,
shape, 	a 	structure 	designed 	to 	pull 	the 	reader 	from 	start 	to
finish. 	“The 	craftsmanship 	of 	the 	writer 	is 	no 	less 	beautiful 	than
that 	of 	the 	cabinet 	maker 	or 	the 	builder 	of 	temples 	or 	fine
violins,” 	writes 	Jon 	Franklin. 	Yes, 	this 	may 	sound 	grandiose, 	but
the 	emphasis 	on 	craftsmanship 	is 	pure 	pragmatism: 	a 	knowledge
of 	the 	basic 	structures 	that 	narrative 	science 	writers 	use 	to
build 	an 	effective 	story. 	I 	think 	of 	this 	approach 	as 	journalistic
architecture. 	Once 	a 	writer 	has 	the 	story 	blueprints 	in 	hand, 	so
to 	speak, 	then 	he 	or 	she 	can 	decide 	which 	structure 	best 	fits
the 	facts 	of 	the 	story 	— 	and 	where 	to 	slot 	them 	into 	place.
* 	grandiose: 	거창한 	** 	pragmatism: 	실용주의
① 	모든 	위대한 	작가는 	천부적인 	감각과 	솜씨를 	타고난다.
② 	다양한 	문장 	구조를 	사용하면 	독자의 	관심을 	끌 	수 	있다.
③ 	글의 	완성도를 	높이려면 	준비에 	오랜 	시간을 	들여야 	한다.
④ 	다양한 	장르의 	글을 	많이 	읽으면 	작문 	실력을 	키울 	수 	있다.
⑤ 	좋은 	논픽션을 	쓸 	때 	기술적 	접근과 	구조적 	설계가 	필요하다.
23. 	다음 	글의 	주제로 	가장 	적절한 	것은? 	[3점]
If 	you 	want 	to 	bring 	something 	into 	shared 	reality 	for 	the
purpose 	of 	social 	coordination, 	you 	have 	to 	describe 	it, 	or 	at
the 	very 	least 	label 	it. 	Even 	the 	ideally 	objective 	pursuit 	of
science 	is 	unable 	to 	escape 	the 	framing 	effects 	of 	language.
Like 	all 	collective 	culture, 	science 	is 	constructed 	on 	report,
reason, 	debate, 	negotiation, 	justification, 	consensus, 	and, 	most
important, 	coordination. 	And 	all 	of 	these 	things 	depend 	on
language. 	Even 	something 	as 	fundamental 	as 	particle 	physics
depends 	on 	language 	in 	a 	particular 	way. 	I 	don’t 	mean 	that
particle 	physics 	wouldn’t 	exist 	if 	we 	didn’t 	describe 	it.
Particle 	physics 	is 	part 	of 	brute 	reality 	and 	so 	it 	will 	carry 	on
independent 	of 	any 	human 	agreement 	or 	understanding 	of 	what
it 	is. 	But 	consider 	this 	remark 	by 	Michael 	I. 	Jordan, 	referring
to 	the 	“infinite 	potential 	well” 	model, 	which 	studies 	how 	a
single 	particle 	behaves 	in 	a 	small, 	enclosed 	space: 	“A 	particle
in 	a 	potential 	well 	is 	optimizing 	a 	function 	called 	the
Lagrangian 	function. 	The 	particle 	doesn’t 	know 	that. 	There’s
no 	algorithm 	running 	that 	does 	that. 	It 	just 	happens. 	It’s 	a
description 	mathematically 	of 	something 	that 	helps 	us
understand 	as 	analysts 	what’s 	happening.”
① 	necessity 	of 	language 	in 	framing 	and 	interpreting 	reality
② 	role 	of 	word 	choices 	in 	science 	to 	avoid 	misinterpretation
③ 	ways 	to 	establish 	scientific 	facts 	without 	linguistic 	framing
④ 	impact 	of 	social 	coordination 	on 	setting 	priorities 	in 	science
⑤ 	difficulty 	of 	naming 	complex 	social 	phenomena 	with 	simple 	terms
24. 	다음 	글의 	제목으로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
In 	fact, 	humans 	are 	known 	to 	have 	the 	largest 	and 	most
visible 	sclera 	— 	the 	“whites” 	of 	the 	eyes 	— 	of 	any 	species.
This 	fact 	intrigues 	scientists, 	because 	it 	would 	seem 	actually
to 	be 	a 	considerable 	obstacle: 	imagine, 	for 	example, 	the
classic 	war 	movie 	scene 	where 	the 	soldier 	dresses 	in
camouflage 	and 	paints 	his 	face 	with 	green 	and 	brown 	color 	—
but 	can 	do 	nothing 	about 	his 	noticeably 	white 	sclera, 	beaming
bright 	against 	the 	jungle. 	There 	must 	be
some 	reason 	humans
developed 	it, 	despite 	its 	obvious 	costs. 	In 	fact, 	the 	advantage
of 	visible 	sclera 	— 	so 	goes 	the 	“cooperative 	eye 	hypothesis” 	—
is 	precisely 	that 	it 	enables 	humans 	to 	see 	clearly, 	and 	from 	a
distance, 	which 	direction 	other 	humans 	are 	looking. 	Michael
Tomasello 	showed 	in 	a 	2007 	study 	that 	chimpanzees, 	gorillas,
and 	bonobos 	— 	our 	nearest 	cousins 	— 	follow 	the 	direction 	of
each 	other’s
heads, 	whereas 	human 	infants 	follow 	the 	direction
of 	each 	other’s
eyes. 	So 	the 	value 	of 	looking 	someone 	in 	the
eye 	may 	in 	fact 	be 	something 	uniquely 	human.
* 	sclera: 	(눈의) 	공막(鞏膜) 	** 	camouflage: 	위장복
① 	Adaptive 	Strategies 	for 	Animals 	with 	Poor 	Vision
② 	The 	Uniqueness 	of 	Human’s 	Visible 	Sclera
③ 	The 	Human 	Eye: 	A 	Window 	to 	Our 	Soul
④ 	Why 	Human 	Eyes 	Evolved 	Various 	Colors
⑤ 	How 	Nonhuman 	Species 	Use 	Sclera 	in 	Communication

-- 3 of 8 --

4 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
4 8
25. 	다음 	도표의 	내용과 	일치하지 	않는 	것은?
U.S. 	Online 	Grocery 	Sales: 	March 	2020 	- 	2023
The 	above 	graph 	shows 	U.S. 	online 	grocery 	sales 	recorded
in 	the 	month 	of 	March, 	from 	2020 	to 	2023. 	① 	Total 	online
grocery 	sales 	peaked 	at 	$9.3 	billion 	in 	March 	2021, 	showing
an 	increase 	of 	$2.8 	billion 	since 	March 	2020. 	② 	In 	March
2022, 	total 	online 	grocery 	sales 	decreased 	to 	$8.7 	billion,
but 	they 	were 	still 	the 	secondhighest 	in 	the 	timeframe
observed. 	③ 	Sales 	of 	shiptohome 	services 	recorded 	the
lowest 	in 	March 	2023, 	and 	were 	exactly 	half 	the 	sales 	of
delivery 	services 	recorded 	in 	the 	same 	year. 	④ 	Although
sales 	of 	pickup 	services 	declined 	after 	their 	peak 	in 	March
2021, 	they 	consistently 	outnumbered 	those 	of 	delivery
services 	throughout 	the 	following 	years. 	⑤ 	While 	sales 	of
shiptohome 	services 	outperformed 	those 	of 	delivery
services 	in 	March 	2020, 	sales 	of 	delivery 	services 	exceeded
those 	of 	shiptohome 	services 	in 	March 	2021.
26. 	Hans 	Hofmann에 	관한 	다음 	글의 	내용과 	일치하지 	않는 	것은?
Hans 	Hofmann 	was 	one 	of 	the 	most 	influential 	art 	teachers
of 	the 	20th 	century. 	Born 	on 	March 	21, 	1880 	in 	Germany,
he 	moved 	to 	Munich 	with 	his 	family. 	When 	he 	was 	a
teenager, 	Hofmann 	produced 	scientific 	inventions, 	including 	a
radar 	device. 	In 	1904, 	he 	moved 	to 	Paris, 	where 	he 	was
deeply 	affected 	by 	the 	expressive 	use 	of 	color 	that
distinguished 	the 	paintings 	of 	Henri 	Matisse 	and 	Robert
Delaunay. 	He 	opened 	his 	first 	school, 	the 	Schule 	für
Bildende 	Kunst(School 	of 	Fine 	Art), 	in 	Munich 	in 	1915. 	In
1930 	Hofmann 	moved 	to 	the 	United 	States, 	where 	he 	taught
at 	the 	Art 	Students 	League 	in 	New 	York 	City 	and 	later
opened 	his 	own 	Hans 	Hofmann 	School 	of 	Fine 	Arts. 	By
1939, 	he 	was 	able 	to 	break 	away 	from 	the 	Expressionistic
landscapes 	and 	still 	lifes 	he 	had 	painted 	in 	the 	early 	1930s.
At 	the 	age 	of 	85, 	he 	was 	still 	very 	active 	in 	his 	studio, 	and
completed 	approximately 	45 	paintings.
① 	십 	대였을 	때 	과학 	발명품들을 	만들었다.
② 	1904년에 	파리로 	이주했다.
③ 	첫 	번째 	학교를 	뉴욕시에서 	열었다.
④ 	1930년대 	초에는 	표현주의적 	풍경화와 	정물화를 	그렸다.
⑤ 	85세의 	나이에 	대략 	45점의 	그림을 	완성했다.
27. 	Primm 	Reading 	Marathon 	Event에 	관한 	다음 	안내문의 	내용
과 	일치하지 	않는 	것은?
Primm 	Reading 	Marathon 	Event
In 	this 	event, 	each 	page 	of 	a 	book 	is 	converted 	into 	5 	meters.
Participants 	will 	reach 	the 	target 	distance 	by 	reading.
Event 	Period
• 	From 	March 	28th 	to 	June 	28th
Qualification
• 	Only 	open 	to 	members 	of 	the 	Primm 	library
How 	to 	Participate
• 	Visit 	Primm 	library 	to 	receive 	the 	reading 	log.
• 	Complete 	the 	reading 	log 	and 	submit 	it 	to 	the 	librarian.
Target 	Distance 	and 	Benefits
• 	Half 	marathon 	(4,200 	pages): 	Completion 	certificate
• 	Full 	marathon 	(8,400 	pages): 	Completion 	certificate 	&
Ecofriendly 	book 	stand
① 	도서 	한 	페이지는 	5미터로 	환산된다.
② 	행사 	기간은 	3월 	28일부터 	6월 	28일까지이다.
③ 	Primm 	도서관 	회원이 	아니어도 	참여가 	가능하다.
④ 	독서 	일지를 	완성하고 	사서에게 	제출한다.
⑤ 	4,200페이지를 	읽으면 	완료 	인증서를 	받는다.
28. 	2025 	Dream 	to 	Screen에 	관한 	다음 	안내문의 	내용과 	일치하는
것은?
2025 	Dream 	to 	Screen
Do 	you 	dream 	of 	seeing 	your 	story 	come 	to 	life 	in 	the
theater? 	Here’s 	your 	chance!
Guidelines
• 	All 	genres 	are 	welcome 	but 	submissions 	must 	be
original 	works.
• 	The 	maximum 	length 	of 	your 	synopsis 	is 	1,000 	words.
Details
• 	Submissions 	will 	be 	accepted 	from 	April 	30th 	to 	May 	15th.
• 	Email 	your 	synopsis 	to 	drscreen@cinevision.org.
• 	The 	winner 	will 	be 	announced 	through 	the 	official
website 	and 	via 	email.
Benefits
• 	All 	the 	participants 	will 	receive 	professional 	feedback
from 	famous 	production 	companies.
• 	The 	synopsis 	receiving 	the 	most 	votes 	will 	be 	adapted
into 	a 	screenplay!
① 	시놉시스의 	최소 	길이는 	1,000 	단어이다.
② 	제출은 	5월 	15일부터이다.
③ 	수상자는 	공식 	웹사이트를 	통해서만 	발표될 	것이다.
④ 	수상자만 	유명 	제작사로부터 	전문적인 	피드백을 	받을 	것이다.
⑤ 	가장 	많은 	표를 	받은 	시놉시스는 	영화 	대본으로 	각색될 	것이다.

-- 4 of 8 --

고 	3 	영어 	영역 	5
5 8
29. 	다음 	글의 	밑줄 	친 	부분 	중, 	어법상 	틀린 	것은? 	[3점]
We 	lack 	a 	sufficient 	vocabulary 	for 	① 	making 	sense 	of
the 	sources 	of 	error. 	The 	more 	scientific 	knowledge 	we
accumulate, 	the 	better 	we 	understand 	that 	the 	ignorance
② 	over 	which 	the 	knowledge 	enterprise 	is 	built 	is
shockingly 	deep. 	For 	instance, 	it 	turned 	out 	that
psychoanalysis’s 	attempt 	to 	delimit 	the 	sources 	of 	error
by 	categorizing 	the 	kinds 	of 	mistakes 	to 	which 	humans
are 	subject 	in 	light 	of 	the 	therapeutic 	situation 	in 	the
talking 	cure 	③ 	draw 	on 	misguided 	assumptions 	about 	the
normalcy 	conditions 	for 	subjects. 	Digging 	deeper 	into 	the
structure 	of 	the 	human 	mind 	as 	well 	as 	into 	the 	specific
embodiment 	of 	human 	knowers 	equipped 	with 	a 	complex
nervous 	system 	④ 	showed 	that 	our 	mental 	life 	is 	filled
with 	illusions 	on 	all 	levels 	of 	knowledge 	acquisition, 	from
sensation 	to 	perception, 	from 	scientific 	discourse 	to 	the
use 	of 	technology 	based 	on 	the 	latest 	scientific
discovery. 	Yet, 	once 	again, 	we 	cannot 	make 	sense 	of 	this
picture 	of 	ourselves 	as 	immersed 	in 	the 	area 	of 	ignorance
and 	illusion 	without 	at 	the 	same 	time 	relying 	on 	a 	huge
background 	of 	shared, 	objective 	knowledge 	that 	makes
our 	ignorance 	⑤ 	available 	to 	us. 	Subjectivity 	and
objectivity 	are 	interwoven 	with 	our 	fallibility.
* 	embodiment: 	화신(化身) 	** 	be 	immersed 	in: 	~에 	깊이 	빠지다
*** 	fallibility: 	불완전성, 	틀릴 	가능성
30. 	다음 	글의 	밑줄 	친 	부분 	중, 	문맥상 	낱말의 	쓰임이 	적절하지
않은 	것은?
Surely 	one 	reason 	that 	copies 	have 	lost 	their 	sense 	of
human 	connection, 	abundance, 	and 	intimate 	relation 	is 	that
modern 	technology 	has 	made 	copying 	so 	easy. 	The 	methods
of 	copying 	available 	to 	us 	have 	never 	been 	more 	powerfully
① 	abundant. 	This 	seems 	true 	even 	as 	a 	sense 	of 	loss 	has
attended 	our 	ever 	more 	powerful 	means 	to 	② 	reproduce 	what
we 	care 	about. 	Walter 	Benjamin 	has 	famously 	formulated 	this
loss 	as 	an 	“aura”: 	that 	which 	is 	③ 	lost 	in 	mechanical
reproduction. 	The 	aura 	of 	a 	work 	of 	art, 	he 	suggests, 	cannot
be 	copied 	by 	mechanical 	technology. 	By 	around 	1900, 	he
writes, 	“technical 	reproduction 	had 	reached 	a 	standard 	that
not 	only 	permitted 	it 	to 	reproduce 	all 	transmitted 	works 	of
art 	and 	thus 	to 	cause 	the 	most 	profound 	change 	in 	their
impact 	upon 	the 	public.” 	The 	④ 	ability 	to 	copy 	mechanically
“substituted 	a 	plurality 	of 	copies 	for 	a 	unique 	existence,”
Benjamin 	argued. 	In 	addition 	to 	transforming 	art 	and 	the
public’s 	relation 	to 	it, 	Benjamin 	asserted 	that 	mechanical
reproduction 	has 	the 	power 	to 	rend 	traditions 	by 	interfering
with 	the 	authority 	of 	objects 	“embedded 	in 	the 	fabric 	of
tradition.” 	This 	⑤ 	devotion 	to 	tradition 	was 	twofold 	and
concerned 	the 	presence 	of 	objects, 	Benjamin 	believed.
* 	rend: 	분열시키다, 	찢다 	** 	embed: 	깊이 	새겨두다
[31 	~ 	34] 	다음 	빈칸에 	들어갈 	말로 	가장 	적절한 	것을 	고르시오.
31. 	Life 	is 	insecure 	and 	human 	wellbeing 	is 	fragile. 	If 	we 	are
honest 	with 	ourselves, 	we 	realize 	that, 	despite 	our 	best
efforts, 	we 	often 	cannot 	control 	the 	vicissitudes 	of 	human
existence. 	We 	go 	through 	life 	in 	fear 	and 	trembling, 	fearing
what 	may 	happen, 	while 	hoping 	for 	the 	best. 	Most 	of 	us 	get
anxious 	in 	the 	face 	of 	an 	indeterminate 	or 	ambiguous
situation. 	We 	don’t 	handle 	uncertainty 	very 	well. 	We 	are
easily 	tempted 	to 	settle 	for 	quick 	“solutions,” 	in 	order 	to
eliminate 	our 	anxiety 	and 	doubt, 	even 	though 	these 	quick
fixes 	may 	not, 	in 	the 	long 	run, 	actually 	be 	adequate
solutions. 	It 	is 	natural, 	therefore, 	and 	even 	somewhat
necessary, 	for 	us 	to 	seek 	in 	a 	sea 	of
change 	and 	indeterminacy. 	We 	want 	a 	fixed 	star 	to 	guide 	us
on 	our 	journey 	through 	hazardous 	waters. 	If 	only 	we 	could
have 	knowledge 	of 	what 	is 	fixed, 	unchanging, 	and 	ultimately
reliable, 	then, 	we 	assume,	
that 	would 	be 	knowledge 	most
worth 	having.
* 	vicissitude: 	우여곡절
① 	reputation
② 	stability
③ 	fluidity
④ 	challenge
⑤ 	interdependency
32. 	In 	one 	of 	the 	most 	famous 	passages 	of	
Being 	and
Nothingness, 	“The 	Look,” 	JeanPaul 	Sartre 	describes 	the
peculiar 	vulnerability 	that 	develops 	when 	someone 	goes 	from
seeing 	(being 	a 	self 	with 	a 	perspective 	on 	the 	world) 	to
being 	seen 	(having 	to 	confront 	the 	perspective 	of 	another 	on
one’s 	self). 	He 	illustrates 	it 	with 	the 	example 	of 	someone
looking 	through 	a 	keyhole 	who 	suddenly 	finds 	himself 	caught
by 	someone 	watching 	him. 	The 	look 	of 	the 	other 	is 	always
unnerving, 	Sartre 	argues, 	not 	only 	because 	we 	momentarily
recognize 	ourselves 	in 	it 	through 	our 	imagination 	of 	their
judgment 	of 	us 	but 	also 	because 	we 	don’t. 	We 	can 	always
step 	back, 	challenge 	our 	perception 	of 	others’ 	perceptions 	of
ourselves, 	or 	explain 	them 	away 	— 	but 	we 	don’t 	know 	what
these 	perceptions 	really 	are. 	Others 	have 	the 	distinctive
power 	of 	making 	us 	feel 	judged 	in 	ways 	we 	cannot 	fully
control. 	Social 	life 	is 	all 	about 	the 	fear 	that 	accompanies 	our
awareness 	that 	we 	can 	never 	.
We 	can 	only 	guess. 	[3점]
* 	peculiar: 	특유의 	** 	vulnerability: 	취약성
① 	access 	what 	the 	other 	sees
② 	be 	certain 	of 	the 	best 	choice
③ 	fully 	comprehend 	social 	consensus
④ 	know 	what 	others’ 	weaknesses 	are
⑤ 	fail 	to 	judge 	the 	validity 	of 	our 	view

-- 5 of 8 --

6 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
6 8
33. 	Perceived 	distance 	of 	objects 	that 	are 	far 	away 	from 	the
observer 	is 	often 	assumed 	to 	be 	subject 	to 	some 	global
limitation 	in 	the 	sense 	that 	the 	moon, 	the 	stars, 	and 	the 	sun
are 	all 	perceived 	at 	the 	“sky”: 	that 	is, 	at 	about 	the 	same
distance. 	This 	observation 	is 	related 	to 	the 	idea 	that 	visual
space 	is 	not 	open 	but 	ends 	at 	visible 	surfaces 	or, 	indeed,
the 	sky. 	Uexküll 	and 	Kriszat 	(1934) 	suggested 	that 	this 	is
realized 	as 	a 	hard 	limit, 	which 	they 	call 	the 	“farthest 	plane.”
If 	an 	observed 	person 	or 	object 	would 	walk 	beyond 	this
farthest 	plane, 	it 	would 	no 	longer 	be 	perceived 	as 	moving
further 	away, 	but 	rather 	as 	shrinking 	in 	size. 	This
observation 	is 	actually 	quite 	common; 	if 	looking 	down 	from 	a
high 	tower, 	for 	example, 	cars 	or 	even 	houses 	on 	the 	ground
below 	may 	appear 	as 	if 	they 	were 	toys: 	that 	is, 	shrunk,
presumably 	because 	they 	are 	perceived 	at 	the 	distance 	of
the 	farthest 	plane 	while 	subtending 	a 	visual 	angle 	that
corresponds 	to 	a 	larger 	distance. 	The 	farthest 	plane 	would
thus 	. 	[3점]
* 	subtend: 	~에 	대(對)하다
① 	prove 	the 	boundless 	reach 	of 	visual 	space
② 	mark 	the 	limit 	of 	the 	perception 	of 	size 	constancy
③ 	cause 	objects 	to 	look 	more 	vivid 	as 	they 	approach 	it
④ 	allow 	objects 	to 	appear 	larger 	as 	they 	move 	beyond 	it
⑤ 	provide 	a 	reference 	point 	for 	calculating 	the 	exact 	distance
34. 	In 	both 	the 	arts 	and 	the 	sciences, 	an 	aesthetics 	of
simplicity 	facilitates 	the 	precise 	communication 	of 	messages.
Both 	are 	also 	fairly 	systematic. 	Although 	many 	people
believe 	that 	art 	is 	by 	definition 	wild 	and 	intuitive, 	while 	only
science 	is 	methodologically 	disciplined, 	there 	is 	a 	great 	deal
of 	evidence 	— 	including 	from 	artists 	talking 	about 	their 	own
practices 	— 	to 	suggest 	that 	art 	is 	often 	created 	methodically
and 	systematically, 	and 	that 	frameworks 	and 	forms 	permit
creativity 	to 	flow. 	Instead 	of 	being 	liberating, 	freedom
without 	limits 	is 	almost 	paralysing, 	because 	without
frameworks 	we 	end 	up 	in 	a 	vacuum 	in 	which 	our 	actions
generate 	no 	response. 	As 	the 	Danish 	poet 	and 	filmmaker
Jørgen 	Leth 	has 	put 	it 	many 	times, 	‘the 	rules 	of 	the 	game’
are 	a 	prerequisite 	for 	artistic 	freedom. 	They 	provide 	a 	solid
form 	or 	structure 	that 	enables 	the 	artist 	to 	make 	use 	of 	‘the
gifts 	of 	chance’ 	(to 	use 	Leth’s 	expression), 	and 	in 	which 	a
part 	of 	the 	world 	can 	be 	exhibited 	in 	a 	nonchaotic 	manner.
In 	order 	to 	create 	beauty, 	.
* 	paralyse: 	마비시키다 	** 	prerequisite: 	전제 	조건
① 	the 	artist 	must 	restrict 	him 	or 	herself
② 	creative 	minds 	must 	maintain 	their 	originality
③ 	the 	creator 	must 	trust 	his 	or 	her 	own 	instinct
④ 	one 	must 	think 	outside 	the 	predefined 	framework
⑤ 	the 	scientist 	must 	embrace 	the 	role 	of 	coincidence
35. 	다음 	글에서 	전체 	흐름과 	관계 	없는 	문장은?
Cultural 	storage 	and 	transmission 	require 	humans 	to
accomplish 	the 	work 	of 	storing 	knowledge 	and 	passing 	it 	on
to 	the 	next 	generation 	by 	means 	other 	than 	DNA. 	To 	that
end, 	humans 	developed 	techniques 	of 	memorization, 	of
transmitting 	knowledge 	through 	education 	and 	by 	using
external 	memory 	devices. 	① 	The 	Chauvet 	cave 	was 	such 	a
device, 	a 	place 	that 	humans 	returned 	to 	generation 	after
generation, 	cooperating 	on 	a 	project 	that 	none 	of 	them 	could
have 	accomplished 	alone. 	② 	Each 	generation 	of 	artists
learned 	techniques 	and 	continued 	the 	work 	of 	previous 	ones,
preserving 	and 	improving 	what 	their 	predecessors 	had
worked 	on. 	③ 	Despite 	advances 	in 	technology, 	there 	is 	a
limit 	in 	restoring 	damaged 	cave 	paintings, 	leaving 	us 	puzzled
about 	what 	those 	paintings 	really 	were. 	④ 	For 	us, 	the 	idea
that 	humans 	might 	work 	on 	a 	single 	system 	of 	caves 	for
thousands 	of 	years 	in 	the 	same 	style 	is 	almost 	unimaginable.
⑤ 	But 	these 	early 	humans 	were 	highly 	conscious 	of 	the
importance 	of 	storing 	and 	preserving 	knowledge 	and 	of
passing 	down 	ideas.
* 	predecessor: 	전임자
[36 	~ 	37] 	주어진 	글 	다음에 	이어질 	글의 	순서로 	가장 	적절한 	것
을 	고르시오.
36.
What 	would 	a 	language 	be 	like 	if 	it 	didn’t 	make	
any
simplifications 	or 	generalizations?
(A) 	There 	might 	be 	some 	superintelligent 	race 	of 	beings
that 	could 	know 	such 	a 	language, 	but 	they 	would 	have
to 	know 	virtually 	everything 	in 	the 	world 	to 	learn 	all
these 	names. 	Human 	language 	has 	taken 	a 	different
route 	— 	many 	fewer 	names, 	with 	a 	loss 	of 	precision, 	but
a 	basic 	vocabulary 	that 	is 	readily 	acquired. 	However,
this 	fact 	is 	not 	simply 	a 	compromise 	with 	our 	limited
cognitive 	capacity.
(B) 	By 	using 	the 	same 	word 	for 	different 	objects, 	we’re
communicating 	information 	about 	those 	things. 	Calling
two 	differentlooking 	things 	“spider” 	communicates 	that
they 	probably 	have 	eight 	legs, 	weave 	nests, 	eat 	insects,
and 	other 	noticeable 	details, 	which 	we 	would 	not 	know
if 	we 	gave 	them 	all 	their 	own 	separate 	names.
(C) 	It 	would 	be 	a 	language 	in 	which 	every 	word 	was 	a 	proper
noun. 	Because 	you 	don’t 	want 	to 	gloss 	over 	the 	differences
between 	snakes 	that 	are 	slightly 	different 	in 	some 	respect,
every 	snake 	must 	have 	its 	own 	name. 	Furthermore, 	every
event 	must 	have 	its 	own 	verb, 	because 	not 	every 	occasion
of 	thinking 	or 	dancing 	or 	talking 	is 	identical.
* 	gloss 	over: 	~에 	대해 	얼버무리고 	넘어가다
① 	(A) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	② 	(B) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(C)
③ 	(B) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	④ 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(B)
⑤ 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(A)

-- 6 of 8 --

고 	3 	영어 	영역 	7
7 8
37.
Selfregulation 	has 	been 	suggested 	as 	an 	alternative
way 	to 	hold 	the 	tech 	industry 	to 	account.
(A) 	But 	without 	consequences 	for 	violating 	them, 	these
charters 	are 	just 	toothless 	statements 	of 	aspiration. 	The
tech 	industry 	is 	basically 	saying:
trust 	us. 	But 	blind 	trust
is 	not 	how 	we 	govern 	doctors, 	lawyers, 	bankers, 	pilots 	or
anyone 	else 	in 	unelected 	positions 	of 	social 	responsibility.
Tech 	is 	the 	exception, 	and 	it’s 	not 	clear 	why.
(B) 	But 	when 	tech 	lobbyists 	speak 	of 	selfregulation, 	they 	are
not 	describing 	it 	as 	it 	is 	understood 	by 	professionals 	like
doctors. 	Unlike 	in 	medicine, 	there 	are 	no 	mandatory
ethical 	qualifications 	for 	working 	as 	a 	software 	engineer
or 	technology 	executive. 	There 	is 	no 	enforceable 	industry
code 	of 	conduct. 	There 	is 	no 	obligatory 	certification.
There 	is 	no 	duty 	to 	put 	the 	public 	ahead 	of 	profit.
(C) 	There 	are 	few 	consequences 	for 	serious 	moral 	failings;
no 	real 	fear 	of 	being 	suspended 	or 	struck 	off. 	Recent
years 	have 	seen 	an 	explosion 	of 	AI 	ethics 	charters 	and
the 	like, 	filled 	with 	wellmeaning 	generalities 	about 	the
responsible 	use 	of 	powerful 	computers. 	[3점]
* 	charter: 	헌장 	** 	mandatory: 	의무적인
① 	(A) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	② 	(B) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(C)
③ 	(B) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	④ 	(C) 	- 	(A) 	- 	(B)
⑤ 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(A)
[38 	~ 	39] 	글의 	흐름으로 	보아, 	주어진 	문장이 	들어가기에 	가장
적절한 	곳을 	고르시오.
38.
An 	alternative 	view 	is 	that 	we 	make 	sense 	of 	the
sensations 	we 	feel 	and 	the 	facial 	expressions 	we 	see
only 	when 	we 	attach 	words 	to 	them 	― 	we 	develop 	rather
than 	inherit 	our 	emotional 	concepts.
We 	experience 	emotions 	as 	different 	bodily 	sensations,
such 	as 	a 	beating 	heart 	and 	sweaty 	palms; 	we 	recognize
emotions 	in 	others 	by 	their 	facial 	expressions 	and 	behaviour.
( 	① 	) 	One 	prominent 	idea 	is 	that 	we 	are 	born 	with 	a 	fixed
set 	of 	basic 	emotions 	that 	are 	universal 	within 	our 	species,
notably 	happiness, 	sadness, 	fear, 	surprise, 	disgust 	and 	anger.
( 	② 	) 	Just 	as 	we 	attach 	the 	word 	gravity 	to 	our 	intuitive
understanding 	about 	how 	objects 	move 	through 	space, 	we
simply 	attach 	words 	to 	each 	of 	these 	innate 	and 	universal
emotions 	once 	those 	words 	become 	available. 	( 	③ 	) 	Key
evidence 	is 	that 	children 	are 	unable 	to 	categorise 	facial
expressions 	as 	representing 	different 	emotions 	until 	they 	have
acquired 	a 	lexicon 	of 	words 	for 	emotions. 	( 	④ 	) 	Before 	having
such 	words, 	faces 	that 	we 	might 	view 	as 	angry, 	sad 	or 	fearful
are 	all 	categorised 	together 	as 	‘unpleasant’. 	( 	⑤ 	) 	By
acquiring 	the 	words 	for 	different 	types 	of 	emotions 	while
experiencing 	sensations 	or 	observing 	their 	expressions 	in
others, 	we 	develop 	a 	set 	of 	concepts 	into 	which 	those
feelings 	can 	be 	placed.
* 	lexicon: 	어휘 	목록
39.
The 	rest 	of 	the 	time, 	even 	as 	individuals 	are 	trying 	their
best 	to 	think 	through 	issues, 	motivational 	goals 	may 	bias
their 	thought 	processes 	and 	bias 	their 	reasoning.
Everyone 	likes 	to 	think 	of 	themselves 	as 	behaving 	in 	an
unbiased 	fashion 	most 	of 	the 	time. 	We 	all 	view 	ourselves
similar 	to 	the 	blindfolded 	statue 	of 	Lady 	Justice 	evaluating
competing 	claims 	without 	bias, 	emotions, 	or 	motivations. 	And
yet, 	overwhelming 	psychological 	research 	suggests 	that 	such
unbiased 	rationality 	is 	actually 	a 	fairly 	elusive 	quality 	in 	humans.
( 	① 	) 	Much 	of 	the 	time 	people 	are 	on 	automatic 	pilot. 	( 	② 	) 	In
other 	words, 	individuals 	are
acting 	without 	reflection 	more 	often
than 	they 	are	
thinking 	carefully 	and 	deliberately. 	( 	③ 	) 	Ziva
Kunda, 	who 	coined 	the 	term 	“motivated 	reasoning” 	to 	describe
this 	phenomenon, 	explained 	that 	although 	individuals 	try 	to 	make
wellthoughtout 	decisions, 	use 	available 	evidence, 	and 	look 	at
both 	sides 	of 	an 	issue, 	the 	process 	is 	often 	tainted 	by
motivations 	that 	may 	be 	unknown 	to 	them. 	( 	④ 	) 	Individuals’
motivations 	may 	direct 	them 	to 	attend 	more 	carefully 	to 	some
information 	while 	ignoring 	other 	relevant 	facts. 	( 	⑤ 	) 	Or 	they
may 	use 	different 	strategies 	to 	evaluate 	information 	they 	prefer
to 	be 	correct 	while 	at 	the 	same 	time 	being 	hypercritical 	of 	flaws
in 	information 	they 	prefer 	to 	be 	wrong. 	[3점]
* 	elusive: 	찾기 	어려운 	** 	taint: 	오염시키다
40. 	다음 	글의 	내용을 	한 	문장으로 	요약하고자 	한다. 	빈칸 	(A),
(B)에 	들어갈 	말로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
It 	may 	be 	assumed 	that 	metaalgorithmics, 	that 	is, 	the
creation 	of 	algorithms 	that 	generate 	other 	algorithms, 	is 	a
human 	creation 	as 	well. 	A 	human 	programmer 	must 	have
composed 	the 	first 	algorithm 	that, 	in 	turn, 	generates 	new
algorithms 	and 	as 	such 	the 	initial 	programmer 	must 	be 	in
control 	of 	the 	original 	idea. 	However, 	this 	is 	not 	necessarily
true. 	Unlike 	humanly 	conceived 	ideas, 	where 	the 	author 	is
the 	intellectual 	owner 	of 	the 	idea, 	algorithms 	are 	processes
that 	define, 	describe, 	and 	implement 	a 	series 	of 	actions 	that
in 	turn 	produce 	other 	actions. 	During 	the 	transfer 	of 	actions
it 	is 	possible 	for 	a 	discrepancy 	to 	occur 	between 	the 	original
intention 	and 	the 	actual 	result. 	If 	that 	happens 	then, 	by
definition, 	the 	author 	of 	the 	algorithm 	is 	not 	in 	control 	of,
and 	therefore 	does 	not 	own 	intellectually 	from 	that 	point 	on,
the 	resulting 	process. 	Theoretically, 	ownership 	of 	an 	idea 	is
intrinsically 	connected 	to 	the 	predictability 	of 	its 	outcome,
that 	is, 	to 	its 	intellectual 	control. 	Therefore, 	in 	the 	absence
of 	human 	control 	the 	ownership 	of 	the 	algorithmic 	process
must 	be 	instead 	credited 	to 	the 	device 	that 	produced 	it, 	that
is, 	to 	the 	computer.
* 	discrepancy: 	불일치, 	어긋남 	** 	intrinsically: 	본질적으로

The 	new 	notion 	of 	intellectual 	ownership 	is 	created 	by
metaalgorithmics, 	as 	algorithms 	can 	produce 	outcomes
that 	are 	(A) 	to 	human 	programmers, 	potentially
(B) 	ownership 	to 	the 	computer 	itself.
(A) 	(B)
① 	unpredictable 	······· 	attributing
② 	prescribed 	······· 	attributing
③ 	unexpected 	······· 	denying
④ 	unexplainable 	······· 	denying
⑤ 	foreseeable 	······· 	transferring

-- 7 of 8 --

8 	영어 	영역 	고 	3
8 8
[41 	~ 	42] 	다음 	글을 	읽고, 	물음에 	답하시오.
Translating 	a 	literary 	text 	is 	challenging, 	and 	it’s 	often
said 	there 	will 	be 	an 	inevitable 	loss 	in 	translation. 	But 	that
challenge 	frequently 	inspires 	creative 	rerenderings 	that 	offer
the 	prospect 	of 	a 	(a) 	gain 	in 	translation 	as 	well. 	A
washingmachine 	manual 	doesn’t 	present 	the 	same 	challenges,
nor 	therefore 	does 	it 	inspire 	the 	(b) 	same 	creativity 	either.
But 	where, 	in 	terms 	of 	the 	opposition 	between 	literary 	and
nonliterary 	language, 	might 	we 	position 	philosophy’s
language? 	Might 	philosophy 	want 	to 	avoid 	a 	translatory
economy 	that 	aims 	for 	a 	gain 	in 	translation 	but 	risks 	a 	loss?
Philosophy 	wishes 	to 	convey 	its 	truths 	intact, 	without 	loss 	—
and 	without 	gain 	either, 	or 	at 	least 	it 	might 	(c) 	hesitate 	to
offer 	its 	truths 	to 	translation 	without 	further 	clarification 	of
what 	a 	gain, 	and 	indeed 	a 	gain 	in
depth, 	actually 	means. 	It
cannot 	be 	a 	matter 	of 	offsetting 	“stylistic 	losses.” 	The 	loss
philosophy 	fears 	is 	a 	loss 	of 	meaning, 	the 	compromising 	of 	a
truth. 	Thus, 	philosophy 	might 	(d) 	refuse 	to 	be 	placed 	on 	the
side 	of 	nonliterary 	language, 	and 	express 	itself 	in 	unstylish
language, 	like 	Badiou’s 	mathematical 	writing, 	so 	that 	no
translator 	is 	prompted 	to 	rude 	and 	bold 	acts 	of 	creative
rewriting. 	If 	philosophy 	wishes 	to 	increase 	its 	range 	and
avoid 	being 	restricted 	to 	a 	national 	or 	regional 	tradition, 	it
(e) 	needs 	a 	translation 	model 	that 	conveys 	philosophical
truths 	to 	the 	world 	without 	any 	“economic” 	fluctuations 	of
loss 	and 	gain.
* 	rendering: 	번역 	** 	intact: 	온전한 	*** 	fluctuation: 	오르내림, 	변동
41. 	윗글의 	제목으로 	가장 	적절한 	것은?
① 	Creative 	Gains 	Emerging 	from 	Literary 	Translation
② 	Translating 	Philosophy: 	In 	Pursuit 	of 	Truth 	As 	It 	Is
③ 	The 	Role 	of 	Creativity 	in 	Conveying 	Philosophical 	Truths
④ 	Factors 	Leading 	to 	Challenges 	in 	Literary 	Translation
⑤ 	How 	Can 	We 	Avoid 	Stylistic 	Losses 	in 	Translation?
42. 	밑줄 	친 	(a)~(e) 	중에서 	문맥상 	낱말의 	쓰임이 	적절하지 	않은
것은?
① 	(a) 	② 	(b) 	③ 	(c) 	④ 	(d) 	⑤ 	(e)
[43 	~ 	45] 	다음 	글을 	읽고, 	물음에 	답하시오.
(A)
In 	a 	small 	town 	known 	for 	its 	flourishing 	academic
community, 	two 	brothers, 	James 	and 	Daniel 	Carter,
stood 	out 	for 	their 	exceptional 	effort 	and 	talent. 	James
and 	(a) 	his 	younger 	brother, 	Daniel, 	both 	applied 	for 	the
Spark 	Fellowship. 	The 	Spark 	Fellowship 	was 	a 	highly
respected 	program 	that 	selects 	and 	supports 	outstanding
students 	every 	two 	years. 	Unsurprisingly, 	both 	brothers
advanced 	to 	the 	final 	round.
(B)
Without 	Daniel 	knowing, 	James 	went 	to 	the 	selection
committee. 	(b) 	He 	told 	the 	committee, 	“Daniel 	has 	always
been 	the 	more 	dedicated 	and 	talented 	one. 	He 	will 	excel 	in
this 	program 	like 	no 	one 	else.” 	Meanwhile, 	Daniel 	had 	the
same 	idea 	as 	his 	older 	brother. 	He 	believed 	that 	his
brother 	was 	the 	more 	ideal 	and 	deserving 	candidate. 	(c) 	He
also 	decided 	to 	visit 	and 	speak 	to 	the 	committee.
(C)
However, 	the 	program 	had 	a 	strict 	rule: 	only 	one 	family
member 	could 	be 	selected 	in 	the 	same 	year. 	This 	posed 	a
challenge 	to 	the 	selection 	committee, 	who 	thought 	it
almost 	impossible 	to 	choose 	between 	the 	two 	equally
impressive 	candidates. 	The 	committee 	gathered 	together,
struggling 	all 	day 	long 	to 	decide. 	When 	James 	found 	out
about 	this 	rule, 	(d) 	he 	tried 	to 	seek 	a 	way 	to 	demonstrate
Daniel’s 	exceptional 	talent 	to 	the 	selection 	committee.
(D)
Not 	long 	after 	James 	had 	left, 	Daniel 	showed 	up 	at 	the
selection 	committee 	and 	advocated 	for 	his 	brother, 	saying
“James’ 	leadership 	and 	vision 	make 	(e) 	him 	the 	perfect
choice. 	He 	deserves 	this 	chance 	more 	than 	I 	do.” 	Moved
by 	their 	selflessness, 	the 	committee 	made 	an 	exception 	by
selecting 	both 	brothers 	in 	the 	same 	year, 	for 	the 	first
time 	in 	its 	history. 	Their 	story 	inspired 	others, 	showing
that 	true 	success 	lies 	not 	only 	in 	individual 	achievements
but 	also 	in 	supporting 	and 	encouraging 	others.
43. 	주어진 	글 	(A)에 	이어질 	내용을 	순서에 	맞게 	배열한 	것으로
가장 	적절한 	것은?
① 	(B) 	- 	(D) 	- 	(C) 	② 	(C) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(D)
③ 	(C) 	- 	(D) 	- 	(B) 	④ 	(D) 	- 	(B) 	- 	(C)
⑤ 	(D) 	- 	(C) 	- 	(B)
44. 	밑줄 	친 	(a)~(e) 	중에서 	가리키는 	대상이 	나머지 	넷과 	다른
것은?
① 	(a) 	② 	(b) 	③ 	(c) 	④ 	(d) 	⑤ 	(e)
45. 	윗글에 	관한 	내용으로 	적절하지 	않은 	것은?
① 	Spark 	Fellowship은 	격년으로 	학생들을 	선발하는 	프로그램이었다.
② 	Daniel도 	그의 	형과 	같은 	아이디어를 	가지고 	있었다.
③ 	위원회는 	함께 	모여 	하루 	종일 	고심했다.
④ 	Daniel이 	James보다 	먼저 	선정 	위원회에 	나타났다.
⑤ 	예외적으로 	두 	형제가 	같은 	해에 	선발되었다.
* 	확인 	사항
◦ 	답안지의 	해당란에 	필요한 	내용을 	정확히 	기입(표기)
했는지 	확인하시오.

-- 8 of 8 --

